Memento 2: Learning by Stateful Reflective Memory
Jun Wang
UCL Centre for Artificial Intelligence
jun.wang@ucl.ac.uk
Abstract
We present a theoretical study of continual and experiential learning in Large Language
Model (LLM) agents that integrate episodic memory with reinforcement learning. We identify
reflection, the ability of an LLM to leverage past experience to inform future actions, as
the key mechanism enabling continual adaptation without fine-tuning model parameters.
Empirical results on Memento [64] and Case-Based Reasoning LLMs [24, 23] show that
episodic, experience-driven reflection supports generalised adaptation in a wide range of
open-ended, long-horizon tasks, implying that efficient learning can occur during deployment
and blurring the traditional separation between training and testing in machine learning.
Motivated by this observation, we introduce the Stateful Reflective Decision Process (SRDP),
a formal abstraction of reflective memory dynamics, where an agent maintains episodic
memory and performs two key operations: writing, which stores interaction outcomes and
corresponds to policy evaluation, and reading, which retrieves relevant cases to make informed
reflective decisions and corresponds to policy improvement. This frames reflective memory as a
control-theoretic object amenable to classical reinforcement learning analysis. We instantiate
this Read–Write Reflective Learning by integrating retrieval into soft policy iteration, with
guaranteed convergence. We formally show that as memory expands and covers the state
space more densely, the composite policy converges to the optimal solution. This theoretical
framework unifies heuristic approaches such as case-based reasoning and retrieval-augmented
generation with principled reinforcement learning and provides a rigorous mathematical basis
for building reflective, memory-embedded LLM agents capable of continual general-purpose
learning.
Figure 1: Learning by Stateful Reflection with Memory realises continual learning without fine-
tuning LLMs by iteratively reading from (policy improvement) and writing to (policy evaluation)
an evolving episodic memory that drives the agent’s online adaptation. Empirically, this Read-
Write Learning paradigm has shown strong effectiveness across diverse domains, including
software testing [24], automated data science [23], and deep research agents [64], demonstrating
that memory-driven reflection can endow LLM agents with genuine self-improving capabilities.
1
arXiv:2512.22716v3  [cs.AI]  29 Jan 2026


1
Introduction
Modern machine learning is about learning from experience [51, 47]; both supervised learning
and reinforcement learning can be viewed as processes of optimising a parameterised model
through experience, either from human-labelled examples or data-driven feedback. The objective
is to learn a mapping from inputs to outputs, or in the case of reinforcement learning, from
states to actions, such that the resulting function generalises effectively to new, unseen situations
[46, 52]. Formally, the learner assumes that the target function is constrained by a family of
parameterised models, for instance, neural networks, where the parameters determine the precise
form of the mapping.
In supervised learning, these parameters are typically adjusted by minimising a loss function
defined over labelled examples, whereas in reinforcement learning (RL), the supervision signal is
indirect: instead of labelled outputs, the agent interacts with an environment, receives rewards,
and adjusts its parameters to maximise the expected cumulative return [49]. In both cases,
the parameters are updated by backpropagation, a gradient-based optimisation algorithm that
propagates errors through the network to refine the model [43].
Despite their substantial empirical successes, current machine learning paradigms suffer from
fundamental inefficiencies in sample complexity. Learning via backpropagation and gradient-
based optimisation typically requires an enormous number of training examples, whether labelled
data in supervised learning or interaction trajectories in reinforcement learning, before competent
behaviour emerges [20, 22]. From a theoretical perspective, this reflects the difficulty of identifying
generalisable structure in high-dimensional, non-linear hypothesis classes when learning is driven
almost entirely by statistical correlations [46]. In the absence of explicit access to semantic
abstractions, compositional structure, or task-level meaning, learning algorithms must recover
regularities indirectly through averaging over large numbers of samples, leading to intrinsically
high sample complexity.
The training of large language models continuously exemplifies this frustration. Although
massive pre-training endows them with broad linguistic and reasoning abilities, adapting them
to specific tasks or domains still has to resort to additional fine-tuning, such as supervised
fine-tuning (SFT) or reinforcement learning with human feedback (RLHF) [37], each demanding
further large quantities of curated data or human annotations [32].
In contrast, humans leverage semantic representations, episodic memory, and reflective
reuse of experience to adapt with far fewer examples [19]. This contrast suggests that learning
mechanisms beyond purely statistical optimisation, based on stateful memory and semantic
reflection, may offer a principled path to lower complexity learning without large-scale gradient
updates.
Interestingly, despite remaining data hungry and inefficient to train, current LLMs exhibit
early signs of human like cognitive abilities that support iterative generalisation to unseen tasks
from only a small number of examples. These emerging abilities can be broadly categorised into
three forms of what we term generalised reflection, as illustrated in Figure 2:
1. In-context learning. As early as GPT-3, researchers observed that LLMs could learn from
a few human-provided examples directly within a prompt, a process known as in-context
learning, where a few labelled examples guide behaviour on new tasks [14] (Figure 2 (a)). For
instance, given a few examples of English-to-French translations in the prompt, GPT-3 can
correctly translate a new English sentence into French without any parameter updates.
2. Feedback-driven reflection. Subsequent studies showed that given a specific unknown
task, LLMs could refine their outputs through interaction with the environment, adjusting
responses based on external feedback [59] (Figure 2 (b)). For instance, in code generation,
the LLM proposes a function, runs tests to observe errors or runtime feedback, and iteratively
refines the code to reach a correct solution.
2


(a) In-context learning
(b) Feedback-driven reflection
(c) Chain-of-thought
Figure 2: Three modes of generalised reflection in LLM agents, where reflection broadly refers
to information gathering or internal computation conducted before an answer is produced: (a)
in-context learning where few-shot exemplars in the prompt steer behaviour on new tasks; (b)
post-output reflection via environmental feedback; (c) internal chain-of-thought and planning
before emitting an answer.
3. Internal reasoning. More recently, LLM models have displayed the ability to perform
internal reasoning via chain-of-thought processes before generating final outputs [57] (Figure 2
(c)). For instance, when solving a math word problem, the model explicitly writes intermediate
reasoning steps (e.g., decomposing a problem into smaller parts) before computing the final
numerical answer.
Although these mechanisms vary in complexity from human-guided examples (Figure 2 (a))
to environment-driven feedback (Figure 2 (b)) to purely internal reasoning (Figure 2 (c)), they
share a common principle: each relies on intermediate reflection such as information gathering
or internal computation to enable adaptation and generalisation beyond the training data.
Such generalised reflection has been observed not only in pre-trained large language models
(LLMs) [14, 22], but also in multimodal LLMs [17] and non-language transformers [28, 61].
In our earlier empirical work [23, 24, 64], we investigated whether reflection through memory
could enable learning without parameter updates. We first introduced this paradigm with case-
based reasoning LLM agents [23], where adaptation arises from updating memory rather than
fine-tuning model weights. Building on this foundation, Memento [64] formalised the idea within
a Memory-Augmented Markov Decision Process (M-MDP) framework. Across domains such as
software testing [24], automated data science [23, 21], and deep research [64], this memory-driven
reflection paradigm has consistently shown that LLMs can achieve continual self-improvement
through accumulated experience rather than model retraining.
In this paper, we further provide a theoretical analysis and formalisation and leverage the
capability of generalised reflection to develop a new paradigm for sample-efficient learning
from experience without relying on data-intensive model training. Instead of updating model
parameters, the proposed learning process operates through intermediate reflection, driven by
relevant past experiences retrieved from an episodic memory [19], as shown in Fig 1. This
framework can unify diverse sources of experience, whether originating from internal reasoning
(e.g., chain-of-thought), interactions with the environment (e.g., ReAct [59]), or human-provided
labelled data, under a single, memory-based learning mechanism.
We establish a theory of redefining how learning and decision-making are modelled through
a proposed Stateful Reflective Decision Process (SRDP). Unlike the traditional Markov Decision
Process (MDP), our framework introduces several conceptual shifts. First, the agent’s state
3


now combines the current situation with its episodic memory, allowing it to incorporate past
experiences directly while still maintaining a coherent Markov structure in this enlarged space
(namely reflected MDP). Second, each action unfolds in two stages: the agent first recalls a
relevant past case from memory, and then the language model produces a concrete response or
behaviour based on that case. Third, the environment’s transitions and rewards are defined
through the probabilistic reasoning of the language model itself, meaning that the model’s
internal uncertainty is embedded in how the world evolves. Finally, memory evolves over time
as the agent writes new experiences into it. This continual update makes the system dynamic
and self-adaptive, without violating the overall Markovian formulation.
Within this formulation, learning naturally emerges from the process of retrieval: policy
improvement is achieved through more effective retrieval, while policy evaluation is realised
through writing experiences back to memory. This mechanism closely mirrors the principles of
episodic control and reinforcement learning in humans [19, 18]. Consequently, such learning can
be efficiently implemented using retrieval-augmented generation architectures equipped with
large-scale memory systems [10, 31].
A key desired property is its self-learnability. With a frozen LLM1 as its reasoning and
reflection core, the agent improves through trial and error when data is limited and later reuses
and combines past knowledge as experience grows. It balances exploitation (using known cases),
exploration (targeted search in uncertain areas), and discovery (seeking new ones) through
adaptive memory operations, achieving continual learning without parameter updates.
The paper is organised as follows. We first introduce the stateful reflective decision process
and its Read-Write Reflective Learning. We then present theoretical results on convergence and
analyse the model’s optimality and its properties as a continuously-learnable agent. Related
work is reviewed next, and the paper concludes with directions for future research.
2
Stateful Reflection as Generalised Learning Methods
Recent advances in reflective prompting, such as Tree of Thoughts [60] and Graph of Thoughts
[8], have demonstrated the potential of structured reflection to enhance LLM reasoning. From a
different perspective, we explore a new learning paradigm that enables models to learn from
experience through reflection grounded in episodic memory, rather than through parameter
fine-tuning [23, 24, 64]. To formalise this paradigm, we introduce the Stateful Reflective Decision
Process (SRDP), which models continual learning as a sequence of reflective interactions with
memory.
We next present the core concepts, with the full mathematical formulation deferred to later
sections. Covering the three modes of generalised reflection introduced earlier (Fig. 2), we define
reflection in this work as follows.
Definition 1 (Reflection). Reflection (generalised) is an iterative mechanism by which a large
language model (LLM) agent progressively improves its effective policy through coordinated
interaction with episodic memory, internal reasoning processes, and environmental feedback. It
is not a single operation but a two-step procedure consisting of a read step followed by a write
step, which together form a closed learning loop.
Figure 1 illustrates the overall workflow of an SRDP. We begin by formally defining episodic
memory as a structured repository of past interaction episodes, consistent with the classical
notion of episodic memory in cognitive psychology [50].
1While LLM parameters may evolve over time through offline updates given adequate data, such updates
typically occur at a much slower timescale. Our approach does not rule out parameter learning, but instead
addresses the intermediate regime in which adaptation must occur without immediate model updates.
4


Definition 2 (Episodic Memory). An episodic memory Mt is a finite (and growing) collection
of memory items
Mt = {mi}Nt
i=1,
mi := (si, ai, ri, s′
i),
where each item mi records a past interaction consisting of the environment state si ∈S, the
executed action ai ∈A, the received reward ri ∈R, and the subsequent state s′
i ∈S. The space
of all finite episodic memories is denoted by M. Episodic memory evolves over time through a
write operation
Mt+1 = Write(Mt, st, at, rt, st+1).
Given a task or query represented as a state s (1), the agent enters an internal reflection
stage (2), during which the LLM performs a read operation on M to retrieve relevant episodic
memory items or their summaries. Conditioned on this retrieved information, the LLM selects
an external action or generates an answer a (3), which is executed in the environment (4) and
produces evaluative feedback, including rewards, correctness signals, or task level assessments.
Finally, the resulting feedback is incorporated into episodic memory via a write operation (5),
which stores new interaction episodes.
Formally, let πt denote the agent’s effective policy at iteration k, implicitly represented by
its prompt, episodic memory contents, and internal reasoning configuration. Reflection defines
an operator T such that
πt+1 = T (πt) = Read
 Write(πt)
.
The Read step corresponds to policy improvement: the agent conditions on retrieved episodic
memories, contextual exemplars, or intermediate reasoning traces to construct an improved
action distribution for the current state,
πt ←Read(πt−1 | st, Mt),
where st denotes the current environment state and Mt the episodic memory state. In LLM
agents, such conditioning reshapes the effective policy directly, without parameter updates.
The Write step corresponds to policy evaluation: the agent generates an action, plan, or
answer under πt+1, producing trajectories
τt := mi = (si, ai, ri, s′
i) ∼πt,
whose outcomes yield evaluative feedback,
ˆV (πt+1) ←Eval(τt),
which is subsequently stored in episodic memory for future reads,
Mt+1 ←Write(Mt, τt ∼πt).
As we shall show in the following sections, this alternating reflective read–write reflective
mechanism is formally analogous to policy iteration in reinforcement learning. Policy improvement
is realised through memory-conditioned inference, while policy evaluation is realised through
interaction-driven feedback and experience accumulation. Under mild assumptions that reading
yields non-decreasing policy quality with respect to accumulated feedback and that writing
provides informative evaluation signals, the iterative reflection process converges to a fixed point
corresponding to an optimal or self-consistent policy.
SRDP generalises and unifies several existing learning paradigms. Compared with case
based reasoning (CBR), which retrieves and adapts discrete past cases for problem solving
[23, 1], SRDP embeds retrieval within a sequential decision making framework. This explicitly
models temporal dependencies, memory evolution, and long horizon effects under a Markovian
assumption, rather than treating cases as isolated problem instances.
5


In contrast to retrieval augmented generation (RAG), which conditions generation on static
external documents or databases [10], SRDP treats memory as a dynamic and stateful component.
Episodic memory is continually updated through interaction with the environment and grounded
in evaluative feedback, allowing retrieval to reflect the agent’s own experience rather than
fixed external knowledge.
From the perspective of memory based reinforcement learning,
SRDP replaces parameter level updates with reflective memory updates mediated by an LLM.
Policy improvement is achieved through structured recall and reflection over episodic memory
rather than gradient based optimisation of model parameters [42]. This shift enables continual
adaptation while keeping the underlying LLM fixed, positioning reflection as the primary learning
mechanism.
This formulation is also strongly inspired by neuroscientific findings on the role of the
hippocampus in episodic memory and reflective cognition [39, 33]. In humans and animals,
episodic recall supports flexible reasoning and planning by replaying past experiences, an ability
mirrored by the reflective cycles of SRDP. Thus, the Stateful Reflective Decision Process provides
both a computational and cognitive bridge: it formalises how memory and reflection together
enable continual, self-improving intelligence without explicit retraining.
Experimentally, it has been demonstrated that this approach enables learning without
fine-tuning across various agentic tasks, including data-science agents [24], software-testing
agents [23], and deep-research agents [64].
3
A Model for Reflective Process over Episodic Experience
Mathematically, the core idea is to extend the Markov Decision Process [41] with an intermediate
reflection stage, where the agent retrieves relevant experiences from external memory before
generating the final output, enabling continual and memory-based learning.
3.1
Preliminary: Markov Decision Process
To make self-contained, we begin by reviewing the Markov Decision Process (MDP) [41], the
standard framework for modelling decision-making in agents. An LLM agent, viewed as a
large language model capable of reasoning and acting through interaction with its environment
[16, 58, 54, 53], can be naturally described within this framework. Formally, an MDP is defined
by the tuple
D = ⟨S, A, P, R, γ⟩,
where S is the state space, A is the action space, and P(s′ | s, a) denotes the transition kernel,
specifying the probability of reaching state s′ after taking action a in state s; R(s, a) ∈R
represents the expected immediate reward; and γ ∈[0, 1) is the discount factor. Here, the state s
corresponds to the current prompt or task context. Specifically, in the context of LLM reasoning,
states correspond to intermediate reasoning steps [54, 56], and when interacting with the external
environment, they may take the form of textual descriptions of the environment state [16]. The
action a is the model’s generated output or decision, and the transition describes how the
environment or subsequent prompt evolves after the model’s response [54]. A (stochastic) policy
π(a | s) defines a probability distribution over actions conditioned on the current state and, in
turn, induces the value function that measures the expected return when following the policy
from a given state
V π
D(s) = Eπ,P
" ∞
X
t=0
γtR(st, at)
 s0 = s
#
,
with the state–action value function
Qπ
D(s, a) = R(s, a) + γ Es′∼P(·|s,a)
V π
D(s′)
 .
6


The optimal value functions are
V ⋆
D(s) = max
π
V π
D(s),
Q⋆
D(s, a) = R(s, a) + γ Es′∼P(·|s,a)

max
a′
Q⋆
D(s′, a′)

.
For large language model (LLM) agents [16, 53, 62], the policy is typically given by the LLM
itself, which maps input states or prompts directly to action distributions through its generative
reasoning process:
πLLM(a | s) ≜pLLM(a | s; θ),
where θ denotes the (frozen in our case) parameters of the pre-trained model. Next, we extend
the LLM’s stochastic policy by incorporating contributions from episodic memory, allowing past
experiences to influence current decisions.
3.2
Stateful Reflective Decision Process
Building on the standard Markov Decision Process (MDP) framework introduced in the previous
section, we now present the proposed Stateful Reflective Decision Process (SRDP). The classical
MDP ⟨S, A, P, R, γ⟩captures agent–environment interaction in its simplest form but lacks
mechanisms for reflection and memory. To enable reflective, memory-driven behaviour, we
extend this formulation by augmenting the agent with an episodic memory space M, a memory
retrieval policy µ, and a stochastic LLM kernel pLLM that generates context-dependent actions
conditioned on both the current environment state and retrieved memory, yielding the Stateful
Reflective Decision Process (SRDP).
3.2.1
Definition
Definition 3 (Stateful Reflective Decision Process (SRDP)). SRDP is a tuple
DSRDP = ⟨S, A, P, R, γ, M, pLLM⟩
that extends the standard MDP formalism by incorporating episodic memory and a language-
model-based decision kernel. The components are defined as follows:
• S: state space;
• A: environment action space;
• P(· | s, a): transition kernel;
• R(s, a) ∈R: reward function;
• γ ∈[0, 1): discount factor;
• M: space of finite episodic memories, where each memory M ∈M is a multiset of cases
c = (s, a, r, s′)2;
• pLLM(a | s, c): the LLM kernel that generates an environment action conditioned on the
current state s and a retrieved case c.
At time t, the agent maintains episodic memory Mt = {mi}Nt
i=1, where Nt is the number
of cases in the current memory, and observes the current environment state st. The decision
process unfolds in two stages:
2In multi-state settings, r can be replaced by an estimated value Q, where Bellman or TD updates are
propagated across memory.
7


s0
M0
c0
a0
r0
s1
M1
c1
a1
r1
st
Mt
ct
at
rt
x0
x1
xt
Environment Dynamics
Memory Read Policy µ(c|x)
LLM Conditioning pLLM(a|s, c)
Memory Write Write(M, s, a, r)
Reward Generation
Figure 3: A graphical model of the Stateful Reflective Decision Process (SRDP) showing the
augmented state space xt = (st, Mt), retrieval actions ct, LLM conditioning, and memory
evolution. Dashed boxes indicate augmented states combining environment state and memory.
1. Retrieval stage: A retrieval action ct is sampled from the current episodic memory according
to the retrieval policy
ct ∼µ(· | st, Mt),
where µ may be similarity-based or learned. The action set is memory-dependent (indexer):
for each M ∈M, C(M) := M, and each c ∈C(M) indexes a memory case used for retrieval.
2. Action Stage: The LLM generates an action conditioned on the retrieved case:
at ∼pLLM(· | st, ct).
This defines a composite policy:
πµ(at | st, Mt) =
X
ct∈Mt
µ(ct | st, Mt) pLLM(at | st, ct).
(1)
After executing the action at, the environment changes to st+1 ∼P(· | st, at), yields a reward
rt := R(st, at), and the memory updates to Mt+1 = Write(Mt, st, at, rt, s′
t).
Figure 3 depicts the graphical model of the Stateful Reflective Decision Process (SRDP),
characterised by a dual-action structure. The agent first performs a retrieval action ct ∈Mt
(green nodes), selecting a relevant past case from memory to guide its current decision. This
retrieval is controlled by the policy µ(c | s, M), represented by the blue arrows connecting the
current environment state st and memory Mt to the retrieval node ct. The policy evaluates
both the similarity between the current state and stored experiences, and the local density of
memory cases. Conditioned on the retrieved case, the LLM then reflects upon the retrieved
experience and generates the environment action at ∈A (blue nodes) via its generative kernel
pLLM(a | s, c), shown by the green arrows. Through this hierarchical process, the retrieval stage
provides contextual grounding, while the LLM generates the final action, jointly realising stateful
reflection, as illustrated in Figure 1.
A key advantage of this dual-action structure is that it defines a composite policy (Eq. 1)
that unifies classical reinforcement learning [49] with LLM-based decision-making [16], thereby
combining the strengths of both paradigms. To illustrate, consider two limiting cases. In the
first case, a naive LLM produces an action a ∈c directly from a retrieved case c, effectively
treating the case as a prompt. Here, the policy reduces to a standard reinforcement learning
or episodic control scheme [9, 40, 42], where the retrieval function µ selects the case c with the
8


highest Q-value, and the corresponding action is executed. In the opposite extreme, when no
relevant experience exists in memory, the agent must rely entirely on the internal knowledge of
the LLM to generate actions. Between these two cases lies the general setting of SRDP, where
the agent can integrate both sources of information, the reasoning capability of the LLM and
the experiential knowledge stored in memory, to produce more adaptive and effective decisions.
The memory evolution mechanism forms a crucial component of the SRDP dynamics. Purple
arrows demonstrate how memory grows through Write(M, s, a, r) operations, with experience
tuples (st, at, rt) being incorporated into the memory at the next time step. This creates a
directed evolution M0 →M1 →· · · →Mt where the memory size |Mt| increases over time,
expanding the agent’s retrieval options.
However, the introduction of memory fundamentally alters the dynamics of the system,
making the process no longer strictly Markovian if the original state is considered. In a standard
MDP, the next state depends only on the current state and action, i.e., the system satisfies
P(st+1 | st, at, st−1, at−1, . . .) = P(st+1 | st, at). However, once we introduce an evolving memory
Mt that accumulates past experience tuples (si, ai, ri), the transition to the next augmented state
depends on the entire history through Mt. Formally, P(st+1, Mt+1 | st, at, Mt) ̸= P(st+1, Mt+1 |
st, at) because Mt itself is a summary of all past interactions. We address this issue next by
defining a simplified MDP that incorporates memory directly into the state representation while
embedding the fixed LLM within the environment dynamics. This formulation enables us to
focus on optimising the retrieval policy, with both the LLM’s behaviour and memory evolution
captured within the new state–transition structure.
3.2.2
Transforming to Reflected MDP
To recover a Markovian formulation, we redefine the state to explicitly include memory, forming
an augmented state, i.e., at time t, the agent occupies an augmented state
xt := (st, Mt) ∈X := S × M.
The resulting process over {xt} is Markovian in this expanded space, even though the
environment process over {st} alone is not.
Each augmented state combines the current
environment state st with the agent’s episodic memory Mt, as illustrated by the dashed rectangles
in Figure 3. Augmenting the state with memory restores the Markov property and enables a
well-defined control formulation, i.e., for any reflection action ct,
Pr(xt+1 | x0:t, c0:t) = Pr(xt+1 | xt, ct),
where the environment transition depends only on (st, at), while the memory update is a
deterministic or stochastic function of (Mt, st, at, rt, s′
t). Since the reflection mechanism and the
LLM action distribution are fixed functions of (st, Mt), all sources of dependence on the past
are captured by xt. Hence the augmented process satisfies the Markov property.
Since our focus is on learning through memory retrieval rather than modifying the LLM
itself, we treat the LLM as a fixed or slow-evolving component of the environment. Its action
generation is absorbed into the environment dynamics via the effective transition and reward
functions PLLM and RLLM. Under this view, the agent’s only controllable decision is the retrieval
action
ct ∼µ(· | st, Mt),
while state transitions and rewards are determined jointly by the environment and the fixed
LLM kernel pLLM(a | st, ct). The resulting Reflected MDP therefore treats the retrieval policy µ
as the agent’s primary policy, with LLM mediated reasoning incorporated into the environment
model. Specifically, we have:
9


Definition 4 (Reflected MDP). The Reflected MDP is a tuple
DReMDP = ⟨X, C, PLLM, RLLM, γ⟩,
that transforms the underlying SRDP, DSRDP = ⟨S, A, P, R, γ, M, pLLM⟩, with the components
are defined as follows:
• Augmented state space: X = S × M, with each state x = (s, M) consisting of the current
environment state s and the current episodic memory M.
• Action space: C(M) := M, consisting of retrieval actions that index and select cases from the
current episodic memory.
• Transition kernel: For x = (s, M) and c ∈C,
PLLM(x′ | x, c) =
X
a∈A
pLLM(a | s, c) 1{x′ = (s′, Write(M, s, a, R(s, a)))} P(s′ | s, a),
(2)
where Write(M, s, a, r) appends the new experience (s, a, r) to memory.
• Reward function:
RLLM(x, c) =
X
a∈A
pLLM(a | s, c) R(s, a).
(3)
The Reflected MDP provides a fully Markovian formulation over the augmented state space
X = S × M, in which transitions and rewards correspond to expected outcomes under the fixed
LLM kernel pLLM. At each time step, the transition unfolds as follows: the agent first retrieves a
memory case ct ∼µ(· | st, Mt); conditioned on this retrieval, the LLM generates an environment
action at ∼pLLM(· | st, ct); the environment then transitions to st+1 ∼P(· | st, at) and produces a
reward R(st, at); finally, episodic memory is updated according to Mt+1 = Write(Mt, st, at, rt, s′
t).
By absorbing the retrieval and LLM generation mechanisms into effective transition and
reward functions over the augmented state space X, this interaction induces a simplified control
process. A policy in the Reflected MDP is defined as a retrieval policy
µ : X →∆(C),
which maps augmented states x = (s, M) to probability distributions over retrieval actions.
Environment actions are generated implicitly by the fixed LLM kernel pLLM(a | s, c) and absorbed
into the transition dynamics. This abstraction captures the full reflective behaviour of the agent
in a compact Markovian form that is amenable to classical reinforcement learning analysis and
learning algorithms.
It is worth mentioning that this augmented state admits a natural cognitive interpretation.
The environment state st encodes the agent’s external sensory or task-level signal, while the
episodic memory Mt represents an internal cognitive state that stores and organises past
experiences, outcomes, and contextual information. The pair (st, Mt) therefore constitutes the
agent’s effective decision state, integrating external observation with internal experience. This
perspective parallels belief-state constructions in partially observable Markov decision processes,
where internal memory summarises relevant history to support optimal control [29], and aligns
with cognitive theories that view episodic memory as a core substrate for human decision making
and learning [50, 19].
The underlying MDP captures the dynamics of the environment alone, independent of the
agent’s internal mechanisms. In contrast, the SRDP explicitly models the coupled interaction
among the agent, its episodic memory, and the LLM during decision making. The Reflected MDP
then provides a Markovian reformulation of this process by lifting the SRDP to an augmented
state space, in which the combined agent–memory–LLM dynamics become Markovian. The
10


relationship between the underlying environment, the SRDP, and the resulting Reflected MDP
is summarised as
⟨S, A, P, R, γ⟩
|
{z
}
Underlying MDP
ext.
−−−→
D
S, A, P, R, γ, M, µ, pLLM
E
|
{z
}
SRDP
equiv.
−−−−→
D
X := S × M, C, PLLM, RLLM, γ
E
|
{z
}
Reflected MDP
, (4)
where a detailed comparison between the SRDP and the Reflected MDP is provided in Ap-
pendix E.
4
Read–Write Reflective Learning
Under the reflected MDP abstraction, continual learning reduces to an iterative read–write
reflective procedure over episodic memory, which we formalise as a learning algorithm next.
4.1
Policy Iteration
We now define the retrieval mechanism that underpins the learning method. The central idea is
to use local state density to guide which past cases should be retrieved from memory. To capture
the similarity structure in the memory bank, we employ Parzen window estimation [38, 55].
Let K : Rd →R≥0 be a smooth kernel (e.g., Gaussian) with bandwidth h > 0, and let
ψ : S →Rd be a state embedding. For memory M = {ci = (si, ai, ri)}N
i=1 and query state s, the
Parzen similarity weight for case c ∈M is:
wparzen(s, c) =
K (ψ(s) −ψ(s(c))/h)
P
c′∈M K (ψ(s) −ψ(s(c′))/h),
(5)
where s(c) denotes the state component of a case c. The kernel defines a probability distribution
over memory cases that places higher weight on states similar to the current query state s. Thus,
the Parzen prior µ0(c | x) over retrieval actions at augmented state x = (s, M) is:
µ0(c | x) ≡wparzen(s, c).
(6)
In order to enable an LLM agent to act even when no relevant past cases exist in memory, we
augment the case set C with a special void case: M ←M ∪{c∅}. The void case c∅represents the
ability of the agent to generate an action directly from its internal world knowledge, independently
of retrieved memory. We formulate this by modifying the prior policy µ0 that incorporates a
state-dependent mixture between memory-based retrieval and the void case. Let K(x, c) be a
similarity kernel for ordinary cases c ∈C, and let K∅> 0 be a constant kernel score assigned to
the void case c∅. Then, the prior distribution µ0(· | x) becomes
µ0(c | x) ≡



K(x, c),
c ̸= c∅,
K∅,
c = c∅,
P
c′̸=c∅K(x, c′) + K∅
,
(7)
where K(x, c) := K
 ψ(s(x))−ψ(s(c))
h

.
It is useful to express this distribution as a mixture. Define the normalised memory-based
distribution
µmem(c | x) =
K(x, c)
P
c′̸=c∅K(x, c′),
c ̸= c∅,
and let
λ(x) =
P
c′̸=c∅K(x, c′)
P
c′̸=c∅K(x, c′) + K∅
.
11


Then (7) is equivalent to the mixture representation
µ0(c | x) = λ(x) µmem(c | x) +
 1 −λ(x)
 δc∅(c),
(8)
where δc∅denotes the unit point mass at c∅. This mixture form shows that the agent auto-
matically interpolates between reflection(retrieval)-driven behaviour when similarity to stored
cases is high (λ(x) ≈1) and knowledge-driven discovery through c∅when similarity is low
(λ(x) ≈0). This mechanism mirrors the “discovery” component in infinite-armed bandits [7],
complementing exploitation and exploration with the capacity to act beyond the current memory.
This mechanism ensures that the agent can always act, even in novel states, while still exploiting
relevant past experiences when available.
We aim for the agent’s final policy µ(· | x) to remain close to a prior policy µ0, while still
being shaped by reward feedback from the environment. To formalise this trade-off, we define a
KL-regularised objective in terms of the state–case value function Qµ(x, c). The KL-regularised
Bellman evaluation operator is
(T µ
KLQ)(x, c) := Ea,s′,M′
"
r + γ
 X
c′
µ(c′ | x′) Q(x′, c′) −α KL
 µ(· | x′) ∥µ0(· | x′)

!  x, c
#
, (9)
where T µ
KL : RX×C →RX×C. It is worth emphasising that all value functions Q(x, c) and V (x)
defined on the augmented state space X of the Reflected MDP are distinct from the value
functions QD and V D of the original MDP (see Section 3.1). The latter are defined over the
environment state space S, whereas the former explicitly incorporate episodic memory and
LLM-mediated action generation through the Reflected MDP dynamics. We shall show that, by
appropriately leveraging these LLM-induced dynamics, the Reflected MDP can approximate the
optimal value functions of the original MDP in a more sample-efficient manner.
For any fixed µ, this operator is a γ-contraction in the sup-norm and admits a unique fixed
point Qµ, representing the KL-regularised value of µ.
KL-Regularised Policy Improvement Given a Q-function over retrieval actions, we
define policy improvement as the solution to a KL-regularised optimisation problem. Namely, at
each augmented state x, the improved retrieval policy is:
µ+(c | x) ∈arg max
ν∈∆(M)
( X
c∈M
ν(c|x) Q(x, c) −α KL(ν(c|x)∥µ0(· | x))
)
,
(10)
where ∆(M) is the simplex over finite set, memory M, and α > 0 is the temperature parameter.
Lemma 5 (also in [35]). The optimisation problem (10) has a unique solution:
µ+(c | x) =
µ0(c | x) exp(Q(x, c)/α)
P
c′∈M µ0(c′ | x) exp(Q(x, c′)/α).
(11)
The proof can be found in Appendix A. Because µ0(c∅| x) > 0 for all x, the improved
policy µ′ always assigns nonzero probability to the void case, preserving the agent’s capacity for
discovery.
For the convergence analysis, we start with assumptions followed with the theorem:
Assumption 6 (Bounded rewards and discount). |r| ≤Rmax < ∞, γ ∈[0, 1).
Assumption 7 (Stationary memory dynamics during evaluation). Within each policy-evaluation
phase, the memory kernel is stationary (equivalently, treat M as part of the state).
Theorem 8 (Convergence of Parzen-KL Soft Policy Iteration). Under assumptions 6 and 7
(bounded rewards and γ < 1 and stationary memory), the process (the reflected MDP) is an
ordinary discounted MDP. Iterations between (9) and (11) (Algorithm 1) converge to a fixed
point (Q⋆, µ⋆) that is optimal for the KL-regularised objective with Parzen prior.
12


Algorithm 1 Soft Policy Iteration with Fixed Memory under Reflected MDP
1: Input: Temperature α > 0, kernel bandwidth h > 0
2: Initialise: Fixed episodic memory M, reference prior µ0(· | x) (including void case c∅),
initial policy µ0, initial Q0
3: for t = 0, 1, 2, . . . do
4:
(Policy Evaluation)
5:
Compute the KL-regularised value function Qµt as the unique fixed point of
Q = T µt
KLQ,
where (Eq. (9))
(T µt
KLQ)(x, c) = E

r + γ
 X
c′∈M
µt(c′ | x′)Q(x′, c′) −αKL(µt(· | x′)∥µ0(· | x′))


x, c

.
6:
(Policy Improvement)
7:
Update the retrieval policy by solving
µt+1(· | x) ∈arg max
ν∈∆(M)
(X
c
ν(c | x)Qµt(x, c) −αKL(ν(· | x)∥µ0(· | x))
)
,
which admits the closed-form solution (Eq. (11))
µt+1(c | x) =
µ0(c | x) exp(Qµt(x, c)/α)
P
c′ µ0(c′ | x) exp(Qµt(x, c′)/α).
8: end for
We refer to Appendix for the proof.
Some discussions: It is worth mentioning that the void case c∅plays a crucial role: by
providing a state-independent baseline probability in µ0, it ensures that policy iteration retains
the ability to discover new behaviours beyond exploitation or exploration of existing memory.
Unlike classical density estimation, our memory cases are not independent and identically
distributed but are gathered sequentially through policy execution. Moreover, the finite memory
constraint means we perform kernel smoothing over a limited and evolving set of points rather
than relying on asymptotic density estimation. As a result, bandwidth selection plays a critical
role in balancing local similarity against statistical robustness as the memory continues to grow.
Several strategies can be used to choose the bandwidth h. Silverman’s rule suggests setting
h ∝n−1/(d+4), where n = |M| is the memory size and d the embedding dimension. Another
approach is cross-validation, which tunes h by optimising performance on held-out retrieval
tasks. Finally, an adaptive strategy decreases h as memory grows, ensuring that neighbourhoods
remain local and informative.
4.2
Two-Time-Scale Convergence with Online Memory Rewriting
The preceding analysis assumes that episodic memory remains fixed.
We now relax this
assumption and allow memory to evolve on a slower time scale. Let ηt denote the step size used
for policy evaluation and improvement, and let ρt denote the step size for memory updates. We
assume a two time scale regime in which
ρt
ηt
→0,
∞
X
t=1
ηt = ∞,
∞
X
t=1
η2
t < ∞.
13


Under this separation of time scales, policy evaluation and improvement operate on a
faster time scale, while episodic memory evolves more slowly. Formally, we make the following
assumptions:
Assumption 9 (Two-Time-Scale Conditions).
(i) Step sizes: ηt > 0, ρt > 0 with:
∞
X
t=0
ηt = ∞,
∞
X
t=0
η2
t < ∞,
∞
X
t=0
ρt = ∞,
∞
X
t=0
ρ2
t < ∞,
lim
t→∞
ρt
ηt
= 0.
(ii) Martingale difference noise: ξ(Q)
t
and ξ(µ)
t
are martingale difference sequences with respect
to the filtration Ft, information available up to time t (random variable with zero conditional
mean) :
E[ξ(Q)
t
|Ft] = 0,
E[ξ(µ)
t
|Ft] = 0,
E[(ξ(Q)
t
)2|Ft] ≤K,
E[(ξ(µ)
t
)2|Ft] ≤K.
(iii) Bounded iterates: The sequences {Qt}, {µt}, {Mt} remain bounded almost surely.
(iv) Memory attractor: The memory process {Mt} has a compact attractor set M∞⊂M.
This means memory size is bounded and the content distribution stabilises over time. In
practice, this is achieved by: 1) Using fixed-size memory, 2) Having policies that converge
to stationary distributions, 3) Using environments that produce stationary experience
streams, or 4) Conservative memory update strategies.
Theorem 10 (Two-Time-Scale Convergence for Parzen-KL Policy Iteration). Under Assump-
tions 6 and 9, let (Qt, µt, Mt) be generated by the following sample-based recursions.
1. Q-update (TD learning, sample form):
Qt+1(xt, ct) = Qt(xt, ct) + ηt
h
δt(Qt, µ0, Mt+1)
i
,
(12)
δt(Q, µ0, M) := rt + γα log
 X
c′∈M
µ0(c′|xt+1)eQ(xt+1,c′)/α
−Q(xt, ct).
2. Policy update (Parzen-KL improvement, sample form):
µt+1(c|xt) = µt(c|xt) + ηt
h
Φt(c|xt; Qt, µ0, Mt) −µt(c|xt)
i
,
(13)
Φt(c|x; Q, µ0, M) := µ0(c|x) eQ(x,c)/α
Zt(x)
,
Zt(x) :=
X
c′∈M
µ0(c′|x) eQ(x,c′)/α.
3. Memory update (experience replay):
Mt+1 =
(
Mt ∪{(st, at, rt)}
with probability ρt,
Mt
otherwise.
(14)
Define the filtration Ft := σ
 (xk, ck, rk), Mk, Qk, µk : k ≤t
, which collects all information
available to the agent up to time (t), including past observations, the current memory state, and
the value function and policy parameters. Define the mean drifts (expected operators) by
HQ(Qt, µt, Mt)(xt, ct) := E[ δt(Qt, µ0, Mt+1) | Ft] ,
(15)
Hµ(Qt, µt, Mt)(c|xt) := E[ Φt(c|xt; Qt, µ0, Mt) −µt(c|xt) | Ft] .
(16)
14


Then define the martingale difference noises as the residuals
ξ(Q)
t+1 := δt(Qt, µ0, Mt+1) −HQ(Qt, µt, Mt)(xt, ct),
(17)
ξ(µ)
t+1(c|xt) :=

Φt(c|xt; Qt, µ0, Mt) −µt(c|xt)

−Hµ(Qt, µt, Mt)(c|xt).
(18)
With these definitions, the recursions can be written in stochastic approximation form:
Qt+1(xt, ct) = Qt(xt, ct) + ηt
h
HQ(Qt, µt, Mt)(xt, ct) + ξ(Q)
t+1
i
,
(19)
µt+1(c|xt) = µt(c|xt) + ηt
h
Hµ(Qt, µt, Mt)(c|xt) + ξ(µ)
t+1(c|xt)
i
.
(20)
Moreover, (ξ(Q)
t+1) and (ξ(µ)
t+1) are martingale difference sequences w.r.t. (Ft):
E
h
ξ(Q)
t+1 | Ft
i
= 0,
E
h
ξ(µ)
t+1(c|xt) | Ft
i
= 0,
and satisfy the conditional second-moment bounds in Assumption 9 ii.
Finally, the conclusions (a)–(c) hold:
(a) The fast variables (Qt, µt) track the stationary-memory soft policy-iteration fixed points:
lim sup
t→∞
inf
(Q∗
M,µ∗
M)∈F(Mt) ∥(Qt, µt) −(Q∗
M, µ∗
M)∥≤ϵ
a.s.
(b) The joint process converges to the limiting set:
(Qt, µt, Mt) →{(Q∗
M, µ∗
M, M) : M ∈M∞, (Q∗
M, µ∗
M) ∈F(M)}.
(c) If Mt →M∞a.s., then (Qt, µt) →(Q∗
M∞, µ∗
M∞).
Appendix C presents the required Lipschitz properties of the memory updates, and Ap-
pendix D provides the detailed proof of Theorem 10. The novelty lies in extending the classical
ODE method to handle structured, state-dependent episodic memory updates and their coupling
with fast policy dynamics under a two–time-scale regime. The key insight is that from the
perspective of the fast variables (Qt, µt), the slow variable Mt appears quasi-static due to the
timescale separation ρt/ηt →0. This detailed proof establishes several key properties of our
Read–Write Learning iteration. First, it demonstrates robustness to memory updates, showing
that the algorithm remains stable even as the memory evolves, provided that memory updates
occur on a slower timescale than value and policy updates. Second, it guarantees tracking
behaviour, ensuring that the value function and policy rapidly adjust to reflect changes in
memory, remaining close to the optimal configuration for the current memory state. Third, the
analysis confirms convergence to local optima, proving that for each fixed memory configuration
(M), the algorithm converges to the corresponding optimal retrieval policy (µ∗
M). Finally, the
timescale separation result provides practical implementation guidance, indicating that memory
should be updated less frequently than the value function and policy.
4.3
The Role of Reflection and Memory towards Optimal Policy
We are now ready to present the complete Read–Write Reflective Learning pseudocode in
Algorithm 2, consistent with the workflow illustrated in Fig. 1.
To ensure practical feasibility, policy evaluation is implemented in an approximate form using
feedback from the environment. Steps (2)–(4) and (5.b) constitute a fast policy iteration loop.
The Read step performs a KL-regularised greedy update of the retrieval policy, while Step (5.b)
approximately evaluates the resulting policy using feedback from the environment. The policy
15


Algorithm 2 Read–Write Reflective Learning (Fast Policy Update, Slow Memory Write)
1: Input: Temperature α > 0, kernel bandwidth h > 0, discount γ ∈(0, 1)
2: Stepsizes: {ηt} for policy evaluation/improvement, {ρt} for memory updates, with ρt/ηt →
0, P∞
t=1 ηt = ∞, P∞
t=1 η2
t < ∞
3: Initialise: Memory M0, Q-function Q0, initial Parzen prior µ0,0(· | x) (incl. void case c∅)
4: for t = 0, 1, 2, . . . do
5:
(1) State and Prior Construction
6:
Observe st and form augmented state xt = (st, Mt).
7:
Construct the reference prior µ0,t(· | xt) from Mt using (6) and (8).
8:
(2) Read: Policy Improvement (Fast Time Scale)
9:
Define the KL-greedy retrieval policy (Eq. 11) induced by Qt:
µt(c | xt) =
µ0,t(c | xt) exp(Qt(xt, c)/α)
P
c′ µ0,t(c′ | xt) exp(Qt(xt, c′)/α).
10:
Sample a retrieval action ct ∼µt(· | xt).
11:
(3) LLM Act
12:
Sample an environment action at ∼pLLM(· | st, ct) and execute it.
13:
(4) Environment Feedback
14:
Observe reward/feedback rt and next state st+1
15:
(5) a. Write (Slow Memory Update): update episodic memory,
Mt+1 ←(1 −ρt)Mt + ρt Write(Mt, st, at, rt, st+1) ,
which denotes a generic slow update consistent with the assumed Lipschitz conditions.
16:
Next augmented state xt+1 := (st+1, Mt+1); Next prior µ0,t+1(· | xt+1) from Mt+1
17:
b. Write (Fast KL-regularised Evaluation): compute the target
yt := rt + γ
 
X
c′∈C(Mt+1)
µt(c′ | xt+1) Qt(xt+1, c′) −α KL
 µt(· | xt+1) ∥µ0,t+1(· | xt+1)

!
,
and update
Qt+1(xt, ct) ←(1 −ηt)Qt(xt, ct) + ηt yt,
which is stored in memory in the tabular case, or updated via function approximation.
18: end for
improvement is monotonic because the Read step solves a KL-regularised optimisation problem
with respect to the current value function (Lemma 5). Given a fixed reference prior, the resulting
update maximises the regularised expected return and therefore yields a policy that is no worse
than the previous one in terms of the KL-regularised objective. Since the subsequent evaluation
step provides an unbiased (or consistent) estimate of the policy value under environmental
feedback, repeated application of Steps (2)–(4) and (5.b) leads to monotonic improvement of the
retrieval policy on the fast time scale (Theorem 19). Step (5.a) implements the slow evolution
of episodic memory. Under the two-time-scale assumptions, Theorem 10 establishes that the
resulting algorithm converges to the optimal policy of the reflected MDP.
Crucially, episodic memory does not merely augment the state representation but directly
parameterises the effective Bellman operator. Each memory update induces a new Reflected
MDP and hence a new policy-evaluation problem. Although the Q-update takes the form
of a standard temporal-difference step, the associated KL-evaluation operator is indexed by
the current memory M through the induced action set C(M), the memory-conditioned prior
µ0(· | x, M), and the memory-dependent transition x′ = (s′, Write(M, ·)).
16


ss
r
good c
B(s, r)
episodic memory
retrieve c
d
 s, s(c)
 ≤r
actions
probability
a1
a2
a3
a4
a5
pLLM(· | s, c)
π⋆(· | s)
1
2
P
a |p −q| (TV)
TV contribution
Figure 4: The illustration of the assumption of LLM local sufficiency.
Consequently, the read–write cycle realises a two-time-scale policy-iteration procedure: for
fixed M, the effective MDP is stationary and the algorithm converges to the locally optimal policy
induced by the current memory coverage, while memory growth drives successive improvements of
the effective control problem. Since the Reflected MDP approximates the underlying environment
MDP through LLM-mediated interaction (cf. (4)), a central question is whether a Read–Write
Reflective Learning agent can asymptotically achieve optimal MDP performance as its episodic
memory expands. We formalise this requirement via reflection consistency, which states that
increasing memory coverage drives the composite policy—combining retrieval and LLM action
selection—toward the true optimal policy.
For an episodic memory M ⊂M, define the coverage radius
rM := sup
s∈S
min
c∈M d
 s, s(c)
,
where s(c) denotes the state component of memory case c. Equivalently, the statewise coverage
radius is rM(s) := minc∈M d
 s, s(c)
.
Let the (deterministic) retrieval rule cM(s) pick any case achieving the minimum. The
LLM-induced composite policy on the original state space is
πM(a | s) := pLLM
 a | s, cM(s)
.
Assume bounded rewards |R(s, a)| ≤Rmax and γ ∈[0, 1).
Assumption 11 (LLM local consistency). There exists a modulus εLLM(r) →0 as r →0 such
that for any s ∈S and any case c with d
 s, s(c)
 ≤r,
TV(pLLM(· | s, c), π∗(· | s)) ≤εLLM(r),
where TV(p, q) denotes the total variation distance:
TV(p, q) = 1
2
X
a∈A
|p(a) −q(a)|
(discrete case),
or
TV(p, q) = 1
2
Z
A
|p(a) −q(a)| da
(continuous case).
The function εLLM(r) characterises the local decision-making capability of the LLM and can
be interpreted as a measure of its local optimality gap. Specifically, it quantifies how closely the
LLM-induced action distribution pLLM(· | s, c) approximates the optimal policy π⋆(· | s) when
the retrieved memory case c lies within a neighbourhood of radius r around the true state s.
A small value of εLLM(r) indicates that the LLM is able to infer near-optimal actions using
only coarse or approximate contextual information. In other words, even when the retrieved
memory does not exactly match the current state, a strong LLM can leverage its internal
17


semantic representations, world knowledge, and reasoning ability to interpolate correctly within
a local region of the state space. Consequently, a good LLM is characterised by an error function
εLLM(r) that remains small even for relatively large values of r, reflecting robustness to imprecise
memory retrieval and limited state coverage.
Intuitively, εLLM(r) captures the effective “radius of competence” of the LLM: it measures
the size of the neighbourhood within which the LLM can reliably recover near-optimal behaviour
from local contextual cues. This property directly determines how densely episodic memory
must cover the state space in order to achieve near-optimal performance. A smaller εLLM(r) for
larger r implies that fewer memory cases are required, leading to improved sample efficiency and
faster convergence of the Read–Write Reflective Learning process.
We now examine the retrieval capability. For a given state s, define δM(s) as the probability
that the retriever selects a case whose associated state lies outside radius rM(s), conditioned
on the existence of at least one case within this radius, due to auxiliary retrieval errors (e.g.,
finite-bandwidth smoothing or finite-sample density estimation):
δM(s) := P
 d(s, s(c)) > rM(s)
 ∃c′ ∈M : d
 s, s(c′)
 ≤rM(s)
 .
Lemma 12 (Retrieval Capability). Under Assumption 11:
TV(πM(· | s), π⋆(· | s)) ≤εLLM(rM(s)) + δM(s)
.
Proof. Let Es denote the event that the retriever selects a good case within distance rM(s) of
state s. By construction, this event occurs with probability at least 1 −δM(s). Conditioned on
Es, Assumption 11 implies
TV(πM(· | s), π⋆(· | s)) ≤εLLM(rM(s)) .
With the complementary event Ec
s, the total variation distance is trivially bounded by
TV(πM(· | s), π⋆(· | s)) ≤1.
Taking expectation over the retrieval event yields
TV(πM(· | s), π⋆(· | s)) ≤(1 −δM(s)) εLLM(rM(s)) + δM(s)
≤εLLM(rM(s)) + δM(s),
which completes the proof.
Lemma 13 (Immediate reward approximation). For any s ∈S, with c∗= cM(s),
 RLLM
 (s, M), c∗ −
X
a
π∗(a | s) R(s, a)
 ≤2Rmax TV

pLLM(· | s, c∗), π∗(· | s)

.
Proof. Write RLLM =P
a pLLM(a | s, c∗) R(s, a) and R∗(s)=P
a π∗(a | s) R(s, a). By Hölder’s in-
equality and the definition of total variation,
 P
a(p−π∗)R
 ≤∥R∥∞∥p−π∗∥1 ≤2Rmax TV(p, π∗).
Theorem 14 (Value difference bound via policy TV). Let π∗be the optimal for the original
MDP, and let πM be the composite policy defined in SRDP. Then
V π∗−V πM 
∞≤
2Rmax
(1 −γ)2 sup
s∈S
TV
 πM(· | s), π∗(· | s)
 =
2Rmax
(1 −γ)2 ∆M.
18


Proof. Consider the Bellman operators (T πV )(s) = P
a π(a | s)
 R(s, a)+γ E[V (s′) | s, a]
. Since
V π∗satisfies V π∗= T π∗V π∗,
∥V π∗−V πM ∥∞≤
1
1 −γ
(T π∗−T πM )V π∗
∞.
For any s,
(T π∗−T πM )V π∗(s)

=

X
a
 π∗−πM
(a | s) R(s, a) + γ
X
a
 π∗−πM
(a | s) E[V π∗(s′) | s, a]

≤2Rmax TV(π∗, πM) + γ ∥V π∗∥∞· 2 TV(π∗, πM),
using Lemma 13’s argument and that |EV π∗| ≤∥V π∗∥∞. Since ∥V π∗∥∞≤Rmax/(1 −γ),
(T π∗−T πM )V π∗
∞≤2Rmax TV(π∗, πM)

1 +
γ
1−γ

= 2Rmax
1 −γ TV(π∗, πM).
Divide by (1 −γ) to get the claimed bound.
Corollary 15 (Asymptotic optimality with growing memory). Under Assumption 11 and
Lemma 12, define
δM := sup
s∈S
δM(s).
Then
∆M := sup
s∈S
TV
 πM(· | s), π⋆(· | s)
 ≤εLLM(rM) + δM.
If rM →0 and δM →0, then ∆M →0 and
sup
s∈S
V π⋆(s) −V πM (s)
 ≤
2Rmax
(1 −γ)2 ∆M −→0.
Hence, as memory grows, the Read–Write operation drives the agent toward optimal performance
in the underlying MDP.
Proof. Lemma 12 implies TV(πM(· | s), π⋆(· | s)) ≤εLLM(rM) + δM(s) for all s ∈S. Taking
the supremum over s yields ∆M ≤εLLM(rM) + δM →0. Applying Theorem 14 completes the
proof.
Corollary 15 formalises the role of episodic memory in enabling asymptotically optimal
behaviour without parameter updates. The result shows that the discrepancy between the
memory-induced policy and the optimal policy of the underlying MDP decomposes into an LLM
approximation error and a memory coverage error. As episodic memory grows and achieves
sufficient coverage of the state space, in the sense that locally relevant memory cases enable the
LLM to approximate optimal actions within neighbourhoods of each state, both error terms
vanish. Consequently, the composite policy and its associated value function converge to the
optimal solution. This establishes that iterative read–write reflection over expanding memory is
sufficient to recover optimal performance in the limit.
5
Related Work
Our work on reflective memory dynamics and Read-Write Reflective Learning builds upon,
yet also departs from, several established lines of research in reinforcement learning and large
language models (LLMs). This section situates our contribution within the broader landscape of
memory-based RL and clarifies the key distinctions from existing approaches.
19


The integration of memory mechanisms into reinforcement learning has long been explored
to address the challenges of partial observability and sample complexity. Early approaches
often relied on recurrent neural networks (RNNs), in particular Long Short-Term Memory
(LSTM) networks [27], to maintain hidden states that capture historical information. For
instance, [26] extends DQN with an LSTM to summarise past observations for Q-learning under
partial observability, providing an early neural-memory approach to POMDPs [29]. However, its
memory is implicit and entangled in the recurrent hidden state, making long-horizon retention,
interpretability, and revision of past information difficult.
More recent methods have taken inspiration from cognitive neuroscience, especially the
hippocampal processes of memory formation and retrieval in humans and animals. For instance,
the Hippocampal-Augmented Memory Integration (HAMI) framework [39] incorporates symbolic
indexing and hierarchical refinement based on hippocampal functions. Although HAMI shares our
biological motivation, our Parzen-KL retrieval mechanism diverges in its probabilistic formulation
and information-theoretic regularisation, which underpin both stability and scalability.
From another strand of memory-based RL, episodic control methods [42] such as Model Free
Episodic Control [9] and Neural Episodic Control [40] use memory primarily as a direct control
mechanism, retrieving past transitions to approximate values or reuse actions via similarity
matching. In this setting, memory effectively acts as a nonparametric policy, and generalisation
is limited to local interpolation over stored experiences [42].
In contrast, our Read–Write Reflective Learning uses episodic memory to enable reflection
in large language models.
Retrieved memory does not prescribe actions directly; instead,
it provides local contextual grounding that allows the LLM to reason and generate actions
within a semantically relevant neighbourhood. Memory thus serves as a substrate for reflective
generalisation rather than as a policy itself. By combining density based similarity priors with
KL regularised updates, our approach yields a principled, scalable retrieval mechanism that
supports stable continual learning while exploiting the LLM’s inherent capacity for local semantic
generalisation.
Recent work on Stable Hadamard Memory [30] highlights the importance of stability in mem-
ory systems, using Hadamard products to calibrate and update stored information. While com-
plementary in spirit, our method focuses instead on retrieval optimisation through information-
theoretic regularisation. These two perspectives, stability of storage and optimality of retrieval,
could be integrated in future research to build more comprehensive memory architectures.
Case-based reasoning (CBR) [1, 3] has long inspired memory-driven problem solving through
the retrieval and adaptation of past cases. Our prior work on CBR-based LLMs [23, 24] provides
empirical evidence, particularly in data science and coding tasks, that LLMs are highly effective
at revising retrieved cases, enabling strong generalisation to new tasks and overcoming a critical
bottleneck in traditional CBR systems. Within our framework, CBR-based LLMs can be viewed
as a stateless special case, for which we provide a principled and unified treatment.
Experience replay, a widely used mechanism in deep RL since its adoption in DQN [34],
has evolved from uniform sampling to prioritised replay [44], where transitions are sampled
according to temporal-difference errors. While these methods improve sample efficiency, they do
not provide the structured, similarity-based retrieval required for generalisation across diverse
contexts. Our approach diverges here by employing density-aware retrieval via Parzen window
estimation, offering more nuanced and context-sensitive access to stored experiences.
Our work also connects to broader developments in information-theoretic reinforcement
learning. Maximum entropy RL [25] introduces entropy regularisation to encourage exploration
and robustness, while KL constraints in algorithms such as TRPO [45] and MPO [2] ensure stable
policy updates. The distinctive aspect of our contribution is the application of KL regularisation
not only to the policy but also to the retrieval process itself. This dual-level regularisation
balances the exploitation of high-value memories with the exploration of diverse experiences,
whilst preserving consistency with the underlying similarity structure.
20


Finally, from a theoretical perspective, our framework extends established convergence
results in reinforcement learning. The convergence proof for our soft policy iteration builds
upon entropy-regularised MDPs [35] but adapts them to the context of memory-based retrieval.
Our two-time-scale analysis further draws on stochastic approximation theory [11], extending
it to SRDPs where value and memory are updated simultaneously.
A central outcome is
the formal equivalence we establish between read (retrieval) and write operations and the
fundamental processes of policy improvement and policy evaluation. This connection makes
retrieval-augmented LLMs provably learnable for the first time, opening the way for reinforcement
learning theory and tools to be systematically applied in this emerging setting.
6
Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper, we have established a formal theoretical foundation for continual learning in LLM
agents through episodic memory and reflection, without requiring parameter fine-tuning. The
core contribution is the Stateful Reflective Decision Process (SRDP), which extends the classical
MDP framework by modeling reflection as a dual-action process: a retrieval stage that reads from
episodic memory (policy improvement) and an action generation stage conditioned on retrieved
cases. By augmenting the state space to include memory, we prove this system is Markovian
and can be analysed as a Reflected MDP. We then introduce Read-Write Reflective Learning, a
practical algorithm that integrates Parzen-window-based retrieval with KL-regularised soft policy
iteration. Key theoretical results include: (1) guaranteed convergence of the policy iteration
algorithm under bounded rewards, (2) two-timescale convergence when memory evolves slowly
relative to policy updates, and (3) asymptotic optimality: as episodic memory grows to cover
the state space, the composite policy provably converges to the optimal policy of the underlying
MDP. This framework unifies case-based reasoning [23], retrieval-augmented generation, and
reinforcement learning under a single mathematical formalism, providing the first rigorous
convergence guarantees for memory-driven LLM agents.
Beyond the theoretical advances, the analysis highlights several practical implications for the
design of memory-augmented LLM agents. Effective performance requires density-aware retrieval
strategies to balance exploration and exploitation. The void case c0 controls the discovery
from the LLM itself whose parameter is required to be tuned. Stability can be enhanced by
implementing soft, entropy-regularised improvements, while systematic memory growth helps
expand state coverage. In addition, similarity metrics and bandwidths should adapt as the
memory evolves to maintain efficiency and relevance.
Despite these strengths, the framework has certain limitations. It might face computational
challenges as memory size increases. Moreover, the impact of embedding quality on performance
is not fully addressed.
Looking ahead, several promising directions for future work emerge. In particular, we plan
to internalise episodic memory within the LLM architecture itself, yielding a unified stateful
neural machine, which we outline next.
6.1
Internalising Episodic Memory into the LLM Architecture
In modern contexts, LLM agents increasingly employ explicit episodic memory systems to extend
context and improve performance across diverse tasks [63, 15, 18]. Yet, the integration of memory
retrieval with decision-making in LLMs still lacks a firm theoretical foundation, particularly
regarding the conditions under which such systems converge to optimal behaviour. Our work
addresses this gap directly.
A natural next step is to integrate the episodic memory and read–write reflection mechanism
of SRDP directly into the LLM architecture, yielding a single neural system whose internal
state corresponds to the augmented state (s, M). Recent “test-time memorisation” lines of
21


work provide useful architectural blueprints. In particular, Titans introduces a neural long-
term memory module that updates while the model is running, thereby supporting continual
memorisation beyond the context window without offline retraining [4]. MIRAS further reframes
modern sequence models as instances of associative memory with explicit choices of memory
structure, retention, and online optimisation [5].
Our EM-LLM work in [18] introduces a
human-inspired episodic memory architecture that enables large language models to operate
with effectively infinite context by selectively storing, retrieving, and reusing past experiences to
support long-horizon reasoning and decision-making. These developments suggest a promising
direction: replace external retrieval of SRDP over a growing case base by an internal memory
state that is updated online, while retaining the SRDP control view in which “read” implements
policy improvement and “write” implements policy evaluation.
Our Read-Write loop differs from Titans-style test-time updates in a key way: SRDP performs
stateful adaptation through experience-grounded reflection and memory evolution, rather than
gradient-based parameter updates of the base model. A concrete research direction is to design
a hybrid architecture in which the LLM remains fixed or slow-updated, but an internal memory
module (or a small retrieval policy head) is updated online using environment feedback, with
a provable two-time-scale separation between fast policy iteration and slow memory evolution.
This would preserve the stability benefits of our reflected-MDP analysis while inheriting the
efficiency and scalability motivations emphasised in Titans/MIRAS [4, 5] and EM-LLM [18].
More broadly, recent work on test-time training layers and nested optimisation provides
a conceptual bridge between architecture and learning dynamics. Test-time training (TTT)
instantiates sequence layers whose hidden state is itself a learnable model updated during inference
[48]. Nested Learning argues that modern deep models can be viewed as systems of nested
optimisation problems with their own internal workflows, offering a principled lens on continual
learning and catastrophic forgetting [6]. An important future direction is to recast SRDP
within this nested-optimisation view: the outer loop corresponds to fixed LLM representations
and long-term objectives, while the inner loop implements read–write reflective adaptation as
an online optimisation over an internal memory state. Such a unification could clarify when
reflection-based memory updates are sufficient for continual learning, when parameter adaptation
is necessary, and how to combine both without destabilising long-horizon control.
Another dimension worth exploring is principled memory consolidation. Recent work on
KV-state consolidation in Transformer architectures (Bottlenecked Transformers) demonstrates
that selectively rewriting and compressing internal memory can improve predictive efficiency
and long-horizon reasoning without expanding context length [36]. From the perspective of
SRDP, such mechanisms provide an architectural realisation of the write operation, transforming
episodic experience into a compact latent state that supports future reflection. This view is
further supported by our work on Agent K, which shows that structured cycles of interaction,
reflection, abstraction, and consolidation enable effective experiential learning without parameter
fine-tuning [21]. Together, these results point toward an architecture in which episodic memory
is consolidated on a slow time scale and queried on a fast time scale, aligning architectural
dynamics with the SRDP formalism.
Finally, these connections open new theoretical questions. MIRAS links sequence modelling
to online optimisation and retention mechanisms [5]; integrating SRDP into this framework may
yield sharper characterisations of memory coverage, approximation error, and the conditions
under which reflective memory updates guarantee monotone improvement and asymptotic
optimality. Establishing such results for neural internal memories (rather than external case
stores) would move SRDP toward a unified neural state machine architecture in which episodic
experience, reflection, and control are implemented end-to-end together.
22


7
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Xue Yan for valuable discussions on reinforcement learning and kernel methods,
Siyuan Guo for insights into bandit algorithms and the discovery–exploration–exploitation trade-
off, and Huichi Zhou and Yihang Chen and Yuxiang Chen for assistance with implementation
and proof-read. We also thank collaborators who reviewed earlier versions of this manuscript
and provided helpful feedback.
References
[1] Agnar Aamodt and Enric Plaza. Case-based reasoning: foundational issues, methodological variations,
and system approaches. AI Communications, 7(1):39–59, 1994.
[2] Abbas Abdolmaleki, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Jonas Degrave, et al. Maximum a posteriori policy
optimisation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.06920, 2018.
[3] Kevin D. Ashley. Modeling Legal Argument: Reasoning with Cases and Hypotheticals. MIT Press,
1990.
[4] Ali Behrouz, Peilin Zhong, and Vahab Mirrokni. Titans: Learning to memorize at test time. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2501.00663, 2024.
[5] Ali Behrouz, Meisam Razaviyayn, Peilin Zhong, and Vahab Mirrokni. It’s all connected: A journey
through test-time memorization, attentional bias, retention, and online optimization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2504.13173, 2025.
[6] Ali Behrouz, Meisam Razaviyayn, Peilin Zhong, and Vahab Mirrokni. Nested learning: The illusion
of deep learning architectures. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2025.
[7] Donald A Berry, Robert W Chen, Alan Zame, David C Heath, and Larry A Shepp. Bandit problems
with infinitely many arms. The Annals of Statistics, 25(5):2103–2116, 1997.
[8] Maciej Besta, Nils Blach, Ales Kubicek, Robert Gerstenberger, Lukas Gianinazzi, Joanna Gajda,
Tomasz Lehmann, Michał Podstawski, Hubert Niewiadomski, Piotr Nyczyk, and Torsten Hoefler.
Graph of thoughts: Solving elaborate problems with large language models. In Proceedings of the
Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2024.
[9] Charles Blundell, Benigno Uria, Alexander Pritzel, Yazhe Li, Avraham Ruderman, Joel Z Leibo,
Jack Rae, Daan Wierstra, and Demis Hassabis.
Model-free episodic control.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1606.04460, 2016.
[10] Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Jordan Hoffmann, Trevor Cai, Eliza Rutherford, Katie Millican,
George Van Den Driessche, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Bogdan Damoc, Aidan Clark, Diego de Las Casas,
Aurélia Guy, Jacob Menick, Roman Ring, Tom Hennigan, Saffron Huang, Loren Maggiore, Chris
Jones, Albin Cassirer, Andy Brock, Michela Paganini, Geoffrey Irving, Oriol Vinyals, Simon Osindero,
Karen Simonyan, Jack Rae, Erich Elsen, and Laurent Sifre. Improving language models by retrieving
from trillions of tokens. In Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML), 2022.
[11] Vivek S. Borkar. Stochastic Approximation: A Dynamical Systems Viewpoint. Springer, 2009.
[12] Vivek S. Borkar and Sean P. Meyn. The ODE method for convergence of stochastic approximation
and reinforcement learning. SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization, 38(2):447–469, 2000.
[13] Stephen Boyd and Lieven Vandenberghe. Convex Optimization. Cambridge University Press, 2004.
[14] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
23


[15] Prateek Chhikara, Dev Khant, Saket Aryan, Taranjeet Singh, and Deshraj Yadav. Mem0: Building
production-ready AI agents with scalable long-term memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.19413, 2025.
[16] Filippos Christianos, Georgios Papoudakis, Matthieu Zimmer, Thomas Coste, Zhihao Wu, Jingxuan
Chen, Khyati Khandelwal, James Doran, Xidong Feng, Jiacheng Liu, Zheng Xiong, Yicheng Luo,
Jianye Hao, Kun Shao, Haitham Bou-Ammar, and Jun Wang. Pangu-agent: A fine-tunable generalist
agent with structured reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.14878, 2023.
[17] Danny Driess, Fei Xia, Mehdi S. M. Sajjadi, Corey Lynch, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Brian Ichter,
Ayzaan Wahid, Jonathan Tompson, Quan Vuong, Tianhe Yu, Wenlong Huang, Yevgen Chebotar,
Pierre Sermanet, Daniel Duckworth, Sergey Levine, Vincent Vanhoucke, Karol Hausman, Marc
Toussaint, Klaus Greff, Andy Zeng, Igor Mordatch, and Pete Florence. Palm-E: an embodied
multimodal language model.
In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine
Learning, 2023.
[18] Zafeirios Fountas, Martin A. Benfeghoul, Adnan Oomerjee, Fenia Christopoulou, Gerasimos Lam-
pouras, Haitham Bou-Ammar, and Jun Wang. Human-like episodic memory for infinite context llms.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.09450, 2024.
[19] Samuel J. Gershman and Nathaniel D. Daw. Reinforcement learning and episodic memory in humans
and animals: An integrative framework. Annual Review of Psychology, 68:101–128, 2017. doi:
10.1146/annurev-psych-122414-033625.
[20] Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Deep learning. MIT press
Cambridge, 2016.
[21] Antoine Grosnit, Alexandre Max Maraval, N RefinathS, Zichao Zhao, James Doran, Giuseppe Paolo,
Albert Thomas, Jonas Gonzalez, Abhineet Kumar, Khyati Khandelwal, Abdelhakim Benechehab,
Hamza Cherkaoui, Youssef Attia El-Hili, Kun Shao, Jianye Hao, Jun Yao, Balázs Kégl, Haitham
Bou-Ammar, and Jun Wang. Kolb-based experiential learning for generalist agents with human-level
kaggle data science performance. arXiv preprint, 2025.
[22] Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin Xu, Qihao Zhu, Shirong
Ma, Peiyi Wang, Xiao Bi, Xiaokang Zhang, Xingkai Yu, Yu Wu, Z. F. Wu, Zhibin Gou, Zhihong
Shao, et al. Deepseek-R1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in LLMs via reinforcement learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948, 2025.
[23] Siyuan Guo, Cheng Deng, Ying Wen, Hechang Chen, Yi Chang, and Jun Wang. DS-Agent: Automated
data science by empowering large language models with case-based reasoning. In International
Conference on Machine Learning, pages 16813–16848. PMLR, 2024.
[24] Siyuan Guo, Huiwu Liu, Xiaolong Chen, Yuming Xie, Liang Zhang, Tao Han, Hechang Chen,
Yi Chang, and Jun Wang.
Optimizing case-based reasoning system for functional test script
generation with large language models. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM SIGKDD Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining V. 2, pages 4487–4498, 2025.
[25] Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Kristian Hartikainen, et al. Soft Actor-Critic: off-policy maximum
entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.01290, 2018.
[26] Matthew J Hausknecht and Peter Stone. Deep recurrent Q-learning for partially observable mdps.
In AAAI fall symposia, volume 45, page 141, 2015.
[27] Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural Computation, 9(8):
1735–1780, 1997.
[28] Noah Hollmann, Samuel Müller, Lennart Purucker, Arjun Krishnakumar, Max Körfer, Shi Bin Hoo,
Robin Tibor Schirrmeister, and Frank Hutter. Accurate predictions on small data with a tabular
foundation model. Nature, 637(8045):319–326, 2025.
[29] Leslie Pack Kaelbling, Michael L. Littman, and Anthony R. Cassandra. Planning and acting in
partially observable stochastic domains. Artif. Intell., 1998.
24


[30] Hung Le, Dung Nguyen, Kien Do, Sunil Gupta, and Svetha Venkatesh. Stable hadamard memory:
Revitalizing memory-augmented agents for reinforcement learning. In Proc. of ICLR 2025, 2025.
[31] Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal,
Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, et al. Retrieval-augmented generation
for knowledge-intensive NLP tasks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
2020.
[32] Hunter Lightman, Vineet Kosaraju, Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Bowen Baker, Teddy Lee, Jan
Leike, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Karl Cobbe. Let’s verify step by step. In The Twelfth
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
[33] James L. McClelland, Bruce L. McNaughton, and Randall C. O’Reilly. Why there are complementary
learning systems in the hippocampus and neocortex: Insights from the successes and failures of
connectionist models of learning and memory. Psychological Review, 102(3):419–457, 1995. doi:
10.1037/0033-295X.102.3.419.
[34] Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Bellemare,
Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level control
through deep reinforcement learning. nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015.
[35] Gergely Neu, Anders Jonsson, and Vicenç Gómez. A unified view of entropy-regularized markov
decision processes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.07798, 2017.
[36] Adnan Oomerjee, Zafeirios Fountas, Zhongwei Yu, Haitham Bou-Ammar, and Jun Wang. Bot-
tlenecked transformers: Periodic kv cache abstraction for generalised reasoning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2505.16950, 2025.
[37] Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
instructions with human feedback. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:27730–
27744, 2022.
[38] Emanuel Parzen.
On estimation of a probability density function and mode.
The Annals of
Mathematical Statistics, 33(3):1065–1076, 1962.
[39] H. Poursiami, A. Moshruba, K. W. Cooper, and et al. A scalable reinforcement learning framework
inspired by hippocampal memory mechanisms for efficient contextual and sequential decision making.
Scientific Reports, 15:25221, 2025. doi: 10.1038/s41598-025-10586-x.
[40] Alexander Pritzel, Benigno Uria, Sriram Srinivasan, Adria Puigdomenech Badia, Oriol Vinyals,
Demis Hassabis, Daan Wierstra, and Charles Blundell. Neural episodic control. In International
conference on machine learning, pages 2827–2836. PMLR, 2017.
[41] Martin L. Puterman. Markov Decision Processes: Discrete Stochastic Dynamic Programming. Wiley,
1994.
[42] Dhruv Ramani.
A short survey on memory based reinforcement learning.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1904.06736, 2019.
[43] David E Rumelhart, Geoffrey E Hinton, and Ronald J Williams. Learning representations by
back-propagating errors. nature, 323(6088):533–536, 1986.
[44] Tom Schaul, John Quan, Ioannis Antonoglou, et al. Prioritized experience replay. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1511.05952, 2015.
[45] John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Pieter Abbeel, et al. Trust region policy optimization. Proceedings
of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning, 2015.
[46] Shai Shalev-Shwartz and Shai Ben-David. Understanding machine learning: From theory to algo-
rithms. Cambridge university press, 2014.
[47] David Silver and Richard S Sutton. Welcome to the era of experience. Google AI, 1, 2025.
25


[48] Yu Sun, Xinhao Li, Karan Dalal, Jiarui Xu, Arjun Vikram, Genghan Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xinlei
Chen, Xiaolong Wang, Sanmi Koyejo, Tatsunori Hashimoto, and Carlos Guestrin. Learning to (learn
at test time): RNNs with expressive hidden states. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.04620, 2024.
[49] Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. MIT Press, 2
edition, 2018.
[50] Endel Tulving. Elements of Episodic Memory. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK, 1983.
[51] AM Turing. Intelligent machinery, a heretical theory. Philosophia Mathematica, 4(3), 1996.
[52] Leslie G Valiant. A theory of the learnable. Communications of the ACM, 27(11):1134–1142, 1984.
[53] Ziyu Wan, Xidong Feng, Muning Wen, Stephen Marcus Mcaleer, Ying Wen, Weinan Zhang, and
Jun Wang. Alphazero-like tree-search can guide large language model decoding and training. In
International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 49890–49920. PMLR, 2024.
[54] Jun Wang. A tutorial on LLM reasoning: Relevant methods behind chatgpt o1. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.10867, 2025.
[55] Jun Wang, Arjen P De Vries, and Marcel JT Reinders. Unified relevance models for rating prediction
in collaborative filtering. ACM Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS), 26(3):1–42, 2008.
[56] Jun Wang, Meng Fang, Ziyu Wan, Muning Wen, Jiachen Zhu, Anjie Liu, Ziqin Gong, Yan Song,
Lei Chen, Lionel M Ni, et al. OpenR: An open source framework for advanced reasoning with large
language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.09671, 2024.
[57] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi,
Quoc V. Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
[58] Yingxuan Yang, Mulei Ma, Yuxuan Huang, Huacan Chai, Chenyu Gong, Haoran Geng, Yuanjian
Zhou, Ying Wen, Meng Fang, Muhao Chen, Shangding Gu, Ming Jin, Costas Spanos, Yang Yang,
Pieter Abbeel, Dawn Song, Weinan Zhang, and Jun Wang. Agentic web: Weaving the next web
with ai agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.21206, 2025.
[59] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629, 2022.
[60] Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Thomas L. Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik
Narasimhan. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. In Proceedings
of the 37th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.
[61] Zhongwei Yu, Wannian Xia, Xue Yan, Bo Xu, Haifeng Zhang, Yali Du, and Jun Wang. Self-verifying
reflection helps transformers with cot reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.12157, 2025.
[62] Yongcheng Zeng, Guoqing Liu, Weiyu Ma, Ning Yang, Haifeng Zhang, and Jun Wang. Token-level
direct preference optimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 58348–58365.
PMLR, 2024.
[63] Wanjun Zhong, Lianghong Guo, Qiqi Gao, He Ye, and Yanlin Wang. Memorybank: Enhancing
large language models with long-term memory. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, volume 38, pages 19724–19731, 2024.
[64] Huichi Zhou, Yihang Chen, Siyuan Guo, Xue Yan, Kin Hei Lee, Zihan Wang, Ka Yiu Lee, Guchun
Zhang, Kun Shao, Linyi Yang, and Jun Wang. Memento: Fine-tuning LLM agents without fine-tuning
LLMs. Preprint, 2025.
[65] Brian D. Ziebart. Modeling purposeful adaptive behavior with the principle of maximum causal
entropy. PhD thesis, Carnegie Mellon University, 2010.
26


A
Proof of Lemma 5
Proof. The Lagrangian for (10) with the constraint P
c ν(c) = 1 is
L(ν, λ) =
X
c
ν(c)Q(x, c) −α
X
c
ν(c) log
ν(c)
µ0(c | x) −λ
 X
c
ν(c) −1

.
Taking the partial derivative w.r.t. ν(c) and setting it to zero, we use
∂
∂ν
h
ν log(ν/µ0)
i
= log(ν/µ0) + 1,
to obtain
∂L
∂ν(c) = Q(x, c) −α

log
ν(c)
µ0(c | x) + 1

−λ = 0.
Equivalently,
log
ν(c)
µ0(c | x) = Q(x, c) −λ
α
−1.
Therefore,
ν(c) = µ0(c | x) exp

1
αQ(x, c)

exp

−1 −λ
α

.
Imposing P
c ν(c) = 1 gives the normalising constant
exp

−1 −λ
α

=
 X
c
µ0(c | x) exp

1
αQ(x, c)
!−1
.
Substituting back yields (11).
B
Proof of Theorem 8
Unlike standard soft reinforcement learning [25], our setting involves state-dependent base
measures that vary with memory content, requiring a careful analysis of the induced operators.
In particular, extending KL-regularised evaluation requires establishing that the associated
log-sum-exp operations preserve contraction for both the value function and the prior distributed
resulted from memory updates. Lemma 16 extends the log-sum-exp Lipschitz bound [13] to this
setting with Parzen base measures and memory updates.
B.1
Bi-Lipschitz Properties
Lemma 16 (Bi-Lipschitz property of log-sum-exp with base measure). Let q, q′ ∈Rn, b, b′ ∈∆n,
and α > 0. Define
f(b, q) := α log
n
X
i=1
bi exp(qi/α).
Then:
1. (Lipschitz in q) For any fixed b ∈∆n,
|f(b, q) −f(b, q′)| ≤∥q −q′∥∞.
2. (Lipschitz in b) If qi ∈[Qmin, Qmax] for all i and ∆Q = Qmax −Qmin, then for any fixed
q,
|f(b, q) −f(b′, q)| ≤αe∆Q/α ∥b −b′∥1 = 2αe∆Q/α TV(b, b′).
27


3. (Joint bound) Under the same boundedness condition,
|f(b, q) −f(b′, q′)| ≤∥q −q′∥∞+ αe∆Q/α ∥b −b′∥1.
Proof. (1) Lipschitz in q (base-measure log-sum-exp). Fix any b ∈∆n and define the
single-argument function
f(q) := f(b, q) = α log
n
X
i=1
bi exp
qi
α

.
The function f is differentiable with gradient
∇f(q) =
"
bi exp(qi/α)
Pn
j=1 bj exp(qj/α)
#n
i=1
,
which is a probability vector (all components are nonnegative and sum to one), hence
∥∇f(q)∥1 = 1
for all q ∈Rn.
By the mean value theorem for vector-valued functions (e.g., [13]), there exists ξ on the line
segment between q and q′ such that
f(q) −f(q′) = ∇f(ξ)⊤(q −q′).
Therefore, by Hölder’s inequality,
|f(b, q) −f(b, q′)| = |f(q) −f(q′)| ≤∥∇f(ξ)∥1 ∥q −q′∥∞= ∥q −q′∥∞.
(2) Lipschitz in b. Fix any q and write f(b, q) = α log(b⊤w) with wi = eqi/α. Then
∇bf(b, q) = α
w
b⊤w.
If qi ∈[Qmin, Qmax] for all i, then
min
i
wi = eQmin/α,
max
i
wi = eQmax/α,
b⊤w ≥min
i
wi = eQmin/α.
Hence
∥∇bf(b, q)∥∞≤α maxi wi
mini wi
= αe(Qmax−Qmin)/α = αe∆Q/α.
Applying the mean value theorem in b and ℓ1–ℓ∞duality gives
|f(b, q) −f(b′, q)| ≤∥∇bf(ξ, q)∥∞∥b −b′∥1 ≤αe∆Q/α ∥b −b′∥1 = 2αe∆Q/α TV(b, b′).
(3) Joint bound. Add and subtract f(b, q′) and apply (1)–(2):
|f(b, q) −f(b′, q′)| ≤|f(b, q) −f(b, q′)| + |f(b, q′) −f(b′, q′)| ≤∥q −q′∥∞+ αe∆Q/α ∥b −b′∥1.
Next, we use the above to establish the contraction for the KL-regularised evaluation.
28


B.2
Contraction of the KL-Regularised Evaluation Operator
We prove Theorem 17 using a single unified Lipschitz lemma for log-sum-exp with a base measure
(Lemma 16), which simultaneously provides (i) Lipschitz continuity in the value argument Q
and (ii) stability with respect to perturbations of the base measure induced by memory.
Theorem 17 (Contraction of KL-Regularised Evaluation). Fix a memory state M and a base
measure µM
0 (· | x) for each context x. Define the KL-regularised evaluation operator T µ,M
KL
acting
on Q : X × C →R by
(T µ,M
KL Q)(x, c) := r(x, c) + γ α log
 X
c′∈C
µM
0 (c′ | x′) exp(Q(x′, c′)/α)

,
(21)
where x′ denotes the next context/state (possibly random) following (x, c), and γ ∈(0, 1) is the
discount factor. Then T µ,M
KL
is a γ-contraction in the ∥· ∥∞norm:
∥T µ,M
KL Q −T µ,M
KL Q′∥∞≤γ∥Q −Q′∥∞.
Consequently, T µ,M
KL
admits a unique fixed point Q⋆
M.
Proof. Fix M and let Q, Q′ be arbitrary bounded functions.
For any (x, c), subtract (21)
evaluated at Q and Q′:
(T µ,M
KL Q)(x, c) −(T µ,M
KL Q′)(x, c)

= γ
α log
 X
c′
µM
0 (c′ | x′)eQ(x′,c′)/α
−α log
 X
c′
µM
0 (c′ | x′)eQ′(x′,c′)/α .
Define, for the (fixed) probability vector b = µM
0 (· | x′),
f(b, q) := α log
X
i
bieqi/α,
q := Q(x′, ·),
q′ := Q′(x′, ·).
By Lemma 16(1) (Lipschitz in q for fixed b), we have
f(b, q) −f(b, q′)
 ≤∥q −q′∥∞= ∥Q(x′, ·) −Q′(x′, ·)∥∞≤∥Q −Q′∥∞.
Therefore, for all (x, c),
(T µ,M
KL Q)(x, c) −(T µ,M
KL Q′)(x, c)
 ≤γ∥Q −Q′∥∞.
Taking the supremum over (x, c) yields
∥T µ,M
KL Q −T µ,M
KL Q′∥∞≤γ∥Q −Q′∥∞,
so T µ,M
KL
is a γ-contraction. Existence and uniqueness of the fixed point follow from Banach’s
fixed-point theorem.
Remark 18 (Stability under memory perturbations). The same Lemma 16 also provides stability
of the evaluation operator to changes in memory-induced base measures. In particular, under
boundedness of Q, Lemma 16(2) implies that for any M, M′,
sup
x′
α log
X
c′
µM
0 (c′ | x′)eQ(x′,c′)/α −α log
X
c′
µM′
0 (c′ | x′)eQ(x′,c′)/α
 ≤2αe∆Q/α ∥M′ −M∥.
This perturbation bound is used later to establish the Lipschitz continuity of the moving fixed
point Q⋆
M and to derive the tracking recursion for two-timescale read–write learning.
We next establish monotone improvement results for Read–Write Learning Iterations (Theo-
rem 19).
29


B.3
Monotone Improvement of Read-Write Iterations
Our analysis relies on the Gibbs variational principle, also known as the log-sum-exp conjugate
duality [13, Section 3.3], which connects entropy-regularised optimisation to exponential-family
distributions. In particular, the Gibbs principle states that
α log
X
i
eqi/α = max
ν∈∆n
(X
i
νiqi −αH(ν)
)
,
where H(ν) = −P
i νi log νi denotes the Shannon entropy.
This identity characterises the
log-sum-exp operator as the optimal value of an entropy-regularised linear objective.
Our setting extends this principle by incorporating a base measure through the Kullback–
Leibler divergence KL(ν∥µ0), replacing entropy regularisation with relative entropy. This yields a
Parzen-style exponential-family formulation and corresponds to the Bregman divergence induced
by negative entropy [65].
Theorem 19 (Monotone Improvement Under Parzen-KL). Let Qµ be the fixed point of T µ
KL
and define µ+ via (11). Then:
V µ+(x) ≥V µ(x)
for all x
Proof: By the generalised Gibbs variational principle with base measure µ0:
α log
X
c
µ0(c | x)eQµ(x,c)/α
(22)
=
max
ν∈∆(M)
(X
c
ν(c)Qµ(x, c) −α KL(ν∥µ0(· | x))
)
(23)
The maximiser is exactly µ+ from (11). Therefore:
V µ+(x) =
X
c
µ+(c | x)Qµ(x, c) −α KL(µ+(· | x)∥µ0(· | x))
(24)
= α log
X
c
µ0(c | x)eQµ(x,c)/α
(25)
≥
X
c
µ(c | x)Qµ(x, c) −α KL(µ(· | x)∥µ0(· | x))
(26)
= V µ(x)
(27)
The inequality follows since µ+ maximises the objective defining V µ.
Finally, we derive the proof of Theorem 8 for the convergence of the Read-Write Learning.
B.4
Convergence of Read-Write Iterations
Proof. Let (Qt, µt) be the sequence of iterates. By Theorem 19, the soft values satisfy V µt+1(x) ≥
V µt(x) for all x.
Since rewards are bounded by Rmax and γ < 1, soft values are uniformly bounded:
V µ(x) ≤Rmax
1 −γ + α log |M|.
The last term uses KL(ν∥µ0) ≥−log |M| for any ν ∈∆(M). Since {V µt} is bounded and
monotone increasing, it converges pointwise to some limit ¯V . By Theorem 17, each evaluation
stage converges to the unique Qµt. The sequence {Qµt} lies in a compact subset of bounded
functions. Any limit point ( ¯Q, ¯µ) must satisfy:
30


• Bellman consistency: ¯Q = T ¯µ
KL ¯Q
• KL optimality: ¯µ maximizes the KL-regularised objective given ¯Q
By continuity of the improvement mapping (11), these conditions uniquely determine the
fixed point, so the entire sequence converges.
C
Lipschitz Properties of Memory Updates
In practice, memory updates typically follow one of these patterns:
1. Experience Replay Buffer:
Mt+1 =
(
Mt ∪{(st, at, rt)}
with probability ρt
Mt
otherwise
(28)
2. Sliding Window Memory:
Mt+1 = (Mt \ {oldest case}) ∪{(st, at, rt)}
with probability ρt
(29)
3. Importance-Weighted Memory:
Mt+1 = Mt ∪{(st, at, rt, wt)}
where wt = f(Qt, µt)
(30)
Throughout, we make explicit the role of memory as an operator-valued state rather than a
raw set. In other words, although memory Mt is implemented as a buffer of cases, the algorithm
accesses memory only through the induced base measure
µM
0 (· | x),
used by the Parzen–KL prior and the KL-regularised evaluation operator.
Definition 20 (Memory distance induced by base measures). Let C be a (countable) universe
of case identifiers. Each memory buffer M ⊆C induces a memory-dependent base measure
µM
0 (· | x) ∈∆C,
with µM
0 (c | x) = 0 for all c /∈M.
We define the memory distance between two memory buffers M and M′ at the operator level
as
∥M′ −M∥:= sup
x TV

µM′
0 (· | x), µM
0 (· | x)

= 1
2 sup
x
µM′
0 (· | x) −µM
0 (· | x)

1.
(31)
All subsequent norms involving memory are understood in this sense.
Assumption 21 (Bounded Q-range). For all x ∈X and c ∈C, Q(x, c) ∈[Qmin, Qmax] and
∆Q := Qmax −Qmin.
Lemma 22 (Lipschitz continuity of the Parzen–KL targets in memory). Assume 20–21. Fix
any Q and define, for each x,
GM(x; Q) := α log
X
c′∈C
µM
0 (c′ | x) exp
 Q(x, c′)/α
,
and
ΦM(c | x; Q) :=
µM
0 (c | x) exp(Q(x, c)/α)
P
c′∈C µM
0 (c′ | x) exp(Q(x, c′)/α).
31


Then for any M, M′ and all x,
GM(x; Q) −GM′(x; Q)
 ≤αe∆Q/α ∥µM
0 (· | x) −µM′
0 (· | x)∥1,
(32)
∥ΦM(· | x; Q) −ΦM′(· | x; Q)∥1 ≤2e∆Q/α ∥µM
0 (· | x) −µM′
0 (· | x)∥1.
(33)
Consequently,
sup
x |GM(x; Q) −GM′(x; Q)| ≤2αe∆Q/α ∥M′ −M∥,
sup
x ∥ΦM(· | x; Q) −ΦM′(· | x; Q)∥1 ≤4e∆Q/α ∥M′ −M∥.
Proof. Fix x and abbreviate b = µM
0 (· | x), b′ = µM′
0 (· | x), and w(c) = exp(Q(x, c)/α). By
Assumption 21, w(c) ∈[eQmin/α, eQmax/α].
(i) Lipschitzness of GM.
Write GM(x; Q) = α log(b⊤w). This map is differentiable in b with
∇b(α log(b⊤w)) = α w/(b⊤w). Since b⊤w ≥minc w(c) = eQmin/α,
∥∇b(α log(b⊤w))∥∞≤α maxc w(c)
minc w(c) = αe(Qmax−Qmin)/α = αe∆Q/α.
By the mean value theorem and Hölder’s inequality,
|GM(x; Q) −GM′(x; Q)| = |∇bG⊤
ξ (b −b′)| ≤∥∇bGξ∥∞∥b −b′∥1 ≤αe∆Q/α∥b −b′∥1,
which proves (32).
(ii) Lipschitzness of ΦM.
Let wi = eqi/α and Z(b) = b⊤w. Then ψ(b)i = biwi/Z(b). Write
ψ(b) −ψ(b′) = b ⊙w
Z(b) −b′ ⊙w
Z(b′) = (b −b′) ⊙w
Z(b)
|
{z
}
(A)
+ (b′ ⊙w)

1
Z(b) −
1
Z(b′)

|
{z
}
(B)
,
where ⊙is elementwise product. For (A), using Z(b) ≥mini wi = eQmin/α,
∥(A)∥1 ≤∥(b −b′) ⊙w∥1
Z(b)
≤maxi wi
mini wi
∥b −b′∥1 = e∆Q/α∥b −b′∥1.
For (B), note |Z(b) −Z(b′)| ≤∥b −b′∥1 maxi wi and Z(b)Z(b′) ≥(mini wi)2. Also ∥b′ ⊙w∥1 =
Z(b′) ≤maxi wi. Thus
∥(B)∥1 ≤∥b′ ⊙w∥1
|Z(b) −Z(b′)|
Z(b)Z(b′)
≤(max w)∥b −b′∥1(max w)
(min w)2
= e∆Q/α∥b −b′∥1.
Summing the two bounds yields (33). Finally, applying Definition 20 gives ∥b−b′∥1 ≤2∥M′−M∥
uniformly over x, proving the stated consequences.
Lemma 23 (Lipschitz continuity of FM in memory for updates (14)–(15)). Consider the
sample-form updates:
δt(Q, µ0, M) := rt + γ α log
 X
c′∈M
µM
0 (c′ | xt+1)eQ(xt+1,c′)/α
−Q(xt, ct),
Φt(c | x; Q, µ0, M) :=
µM
0 (c | x)eQ(x,c)/α
P
c′∈M µM
0 (c′ | x)eQ(x,c′)/α .
Let FM(Z) denote the mean-field drift of (Q, µ) induced by these targets (i.e., conditional
expectations given the current state). Under 20–21, there exists LF < ∞such that for any fixed
Z = (Q, µ),
∥FM′(Z) −FM(Z)∥≤LF ∥M′ −M∥.
In particular, one may take LF proportional to e∆Q/α.
32


Proof. Memory enters the TD target only through the log-sum-exp term GM(xt+1; Q), and
enters the policy target only through ΦM(· | xt; Q). By Lemma 22, both of these are Lipschitz
in M under the distance (20), uniformly in x. Taking conditional expectations (to pass from
sample form to mean-field drift) preserves Lipschitz constants. Therefore the combined drift
mapping FM(Z) is Lipschitz in memory, with constant LF depending on γ, α and the bounded
range ∆Q, and scaling as O(e∆Q/α).
D
Proof of Theorem 10
We are not ready to prove Theorem 10 using the ODE method for two-timescale stochastic
approximation [11, 12].
D.1
Fast Timescale: Fixed-Memory Dynamics
Fix a memory state M. Let Z = (Q, µ) denote the fast variables, and define the KL-regularised
operator
Z 7→FM(Z),
which combines KL-regularised policy evaluation and Parzen–KL policy improvement. The
stochastic updates (12) and (13) are stochastic approximations of the limiting ODE
dZ
dτ = FM(Z) −Z,
(34)
where τ denotes fast time.
Assumption 24 (Uniform Contraction). There exists κ ∈(0, 1) such that for all M and all
Z, Z′,
∥FM(Z) −FM(Z′)∥≤κ∥Z −Z′∥.
By Theorems 17 and 19, Assumption 24 holds and the ODE (34) admits a unique globally
asymptotically stable equilibrium
Z⋆
M = (Q⋆
M, µ⋆
M).
D.2
Perturbed Contraction and Fixed-Point Lipschitz Continuity
We next quantify how the equilibrium depends on memory.
Lemma 25 (Lipschitz Continuity of the Fixed Point). Assume:
1. FM is a κ-contraction uniformly in M;
2. FM is Lipschitz in memory:
∥FM′(Z) −FM(Z)∥≤LF ∥M′ −M∥
∀Z.
Then the fixed point satisfies
∥Z⋆
M′ −Z⋆
M∥≤
LF
1 −κ ∥M′ −M∥.
Proof. Using Z⋆
M = FM(Z⋆
M),
∥Z⋆
M′ −Z⋆
M∥= ∥FM′(Z⋆
M′) −FM(Z⋆
M)∥
≤∥FM′(Z⋆
M′) −FM′(Z⋆
M)∥+ ∥FM′(Z⋆
M) −FM(Z⋆
M)∥
≤κ∥Z⋆
M′ −Z⋆
M∥+ LF ∥M′ −M∥.
Rearranging yields the claim.
33


D.3
Slow Timescale: Memory Dynamics
Memory updates take the stochastic approximation form
Mt+1 = Mt + ρt
h(Mt, Zt) + ξ(M)
t
,
(35)
where Zt = (Qt, µt), h is the expected update, and ξ(M)
t
is a martingale difference noise term.
The associated slow ODE is
dM
dς = h(M),
(36)
with ς denoting slow time. By Assumption 9(iv), this ODE admits a compact attractor set M∞.
We also have ∥Mt+1−Mt∥= O(ρt), a.k.a., supt ∥Mt+1−Mt∥/ρt < ∞. Under the distance (20),
each of the following practical update schemes induces a change of order ρt:
1. Experience replay: a new case is added with probability ρt, changing the induced base
measure by O(ρt).
2. Sliding window: one case is replaced with probability ρt, yielding an O(ρt) change.
3. Importance-weighted memory: weights are updated by a step ρt and the induced base
measure changes Lipschitzly.
Hence ∥Mt+1 −Mt∥= O(ρt) almost surely.
D.4
Tracking Lemma for Two-Timescale SA
We now state the tracking result used in the proof.
Lemma 26 (Tracking Lemma). Suppose:
1. For each fixed M, the fast ODE (34) has a globally asymptotically stable equilibrium Z⋆
M;
2. Z⋆
M is Lipschitz in M as in Lemma 25;
3. The step sizes satisfy ρt/ηt →0.
Then
∥Zt −Z⋆
Mt∥→0
almost surely.
Lemma 26 follows from standard two-timescale stochastic approximation results; see [11, 12].
D.5
Derivation of the Tracking Recursion
Define the tracking error
ϵt = ∥Zt −Z⋆
Mt∥.
The fast update admits the form
Zt+1 = Zt + ηt
 FMt+1(Zt) −Zt
 + ηtξt,
with martingale noise ξt. Using contraction of FM, Lipschitz continuity of Z⋆
M, and the triangle
inequality, we obtain
ϵt+1 ≤(1 −ηtλ)ϵt + ηtL∥Mt+1 −Mt∥+ ηt∥ξt∥,
(37)
where λ = 1 −κ > 0 and L is the constant from Lemma 25. Since ∥Mt+1 −Mt∥= O(ρt) and
ρt = o(ηt), the drift term is negligible relative to the contraction.
34


Concept
Underlying MDP
SRDP
Reflected MDP
Decision process
D = ⟨S, A, P, R, γ⟩
DSRDP
=
⟨S, A, P, R, γ, M, pLLM⟩
DReMDP
=
⟨X, C, PLLM, RLLM, γ⟩
State space
s ∈S
s ∈S (environment state)
x = (s, M) ∈X := S × M
Action space
a ∈A
Two-stage:
retrieval c ∈
C(M), then a ∈A
Retrieval only: c ∈C(M)
Memory
None
Episodic memory M ∈M,
evolving via Write
Included in state: M is part of
x = (s, M)
Retrieval action
set
N/A
C(M) := M (memory index-
ers)
C(M) := M
Policy
π(a | s)
Composite
policy:
πµ(a | s, M) =
X
c∈M
µ(c |
s, M) pLLM(a | s, c)
Retrieval policy µ(c | x)
LLM kernel
N/A
pLLM(a | s, c)
Absorbed into PLLM, RLLM
Transition kernel
P(s′ | s, a)
s′ ∼P(· | s, a),
M ′ = Write(M, s, a, r, s′)
PLLM(x′ | x, c) = P
a pLLM(a |
s, c) P(s′ | s, a)
Reward
R(s, a)
r = R(s, a)
RLLM(x, c) = P
a pLLM(a |
s, c)R(s, a)
Markov property
Markov in s
Non-Markov in s due to
evolving M
Markov in augmented state
x = (s, M)
Learning focus
Action selection
Retrieval + memory growth
Retrieval policy optimisation
Role
Models environment
dynamics
Models
agent–memory–
LLM interaction
Markovian control abstraction
of SRDP
Table 1: Comparison of notations for the underlying MDP, Stateful Reflective Decision Process
(SRDP), and the Reflected MDP.
D.6
Convergence to the Limit Set
By Lemma 26, ϵt →0 almost surely. Since Mt →M∞, all limit points of (Zt, Mt) lie in
L = {(Z⋆
M, M) : M ∈M∞}.
If Mt →M∞, then (Qt, µt) →(Q⋆
M∞, µ⋆
M∞) almost surely.
This completes the proof.
E
Notations of MDP, SRDP, and Reflected MDP
Table 1 summarises and contrasts the notation used for the underlying Markov Decision Process
(MDP), the Stateful Reflective Decision Process (SRDP) (Definition 3), and its Markovian
reformulation as the Reflected MDP (Definition 4). The underlying MDP models only the
environment dynamics, abstracting away any internal structure of the agent. The SRDP extends
this framework by explicitly modelling episodic memory and a two-stage decision mechanism,
in which a retrieval action selects a memory case that conditions the LLM’s action generation.
Since the evolving memory breaks the Markov property in the original state space, the Reflected
MDP restores Markovianity by augmenting the state with memory and absorbing the fixed
LLM behaviour into effective transition and reward kernels. This reformulation allows classical
reinforcement learning analysis to be applied while preserving the full agent–memory–LLM
interaction dynamics.
35
