Predicting vs. Acting:
A Trade-off Between World Modeling & Agent Modeling
*Margaret Li1,2
*Weijia Shi1,2
Artidoro Pagnoni1,2
Peter West1,3
Ari Holtzman2,4
1University of Washington
2Meta
3University of British Columbia
4University of Chicago
{margsli,swj0419,artidoro}@cs.washington.edu
pwest@cs.ubc.ca
aholtzman@uchicago.edu
Abstract
RLHF-aligned LMs have shown unprecedented
ability on both benchmarks and long-form text
generation, yet they struggle with one founda-
tional task: next-token prediction. As RLHF
models become agent models aimed at interact-
ing with humans, they seem to lose their world
modeling—the ability to predict what comes
next in arbitrary documents, which is the foun-
dational training objective of the Base LMs that
RLHF adapts.
Besides empirically demonstrating this trade-
off,
we propose a potential explanation:
to perform coherent long-form generation,
RLHF models restrict randomness via implicit
blueprints. In particular, RLHF models con-
centrate probability on sets of anchor spans
that co-occur across multiple generations for
the same prompt, serving as textual scaffolding
but also limiting a model’s ability to generate
documents that do not include these spans. We
study this trade-off on the most effective cur-
rent agent models, those aligned with RLHF,
while exploring why this may remain a funda-
mental trade-off between models that act and
those that predict, even as alignment techniques
improve.
1
Introduction
Alignment via RLHF (Ivison et al., 2023; Touvron
et al., 2023) trains models towards action: complet-
ing specific goals and excelling across both short
and long-form textual tasks. RLHF works by adapt-
ing base LMs that are trained to be world models,
accurately predicting the distribution of text that
might occur after an arbitrary prefix. While RLHF
models tend to excel at complex tasks, in this work
we find that they partially lose the world model-
ing abilities that allow base LMs to simulate docu-
ments from the broader distribution of the internet.
*Authors contributed equally
We propose that this trade-off is a natural result of
RLHF models concentrating probability to specific
spans, which allows these models to blueprint long-
form generation (Figure 1) but reduces their ability
to model arbitrary text.
Specifically, RLHF models struggle with next-
token prediction which directly measures ability
to world model, even when they are finetuned to
regain these skills (§2). RLHF models seem to con-
centrate probability on a smaller set of text (§3),
which follows past work on distributional collapse
(Shumailov et al., 2023). Yet this concentration
may have a use: making generation more self-
predictable, and helping to blueprint long-form text
generations. For example, we find anchor spans
(Figure 1) which appear across many samples for
the same prompt, and seem to serve as scaffolding
for generation (§4).
Is a trade-off between world modeling and
agent modeling fundamental? We argue that self-
predictability is likely an inevitable aspect of suc-
cessful agent models, not just a spurious byprod-
uct of RLHF. In order to generate coherent long-
form responses (or act towards goals in general)
an agent must guarantee that its future actions are
largely predictable to its current self. In effect,
agent modeling may require minimizing long-term
uncertainty while world modeling requires main-
taining the true uncertainty of natural text docu-
ments, a fundamental trade-off. We briefly explore
this question in §5.
Such a trade-off would suggest that methods for
adapting models to useful tasks, such as RLHF,
will tend to narrow the breadth of a model. In other
words, an agent model that takes actions towards
a long-term goal may not be fully representative
of the broader distribution of all possible agents
and goals. General systems covering both sets of
abilities might combine agent and world models
rather than relying on agent models to both act and
predict.
arXiv:2407.02446v1  [cs.CL]  2 Jul 2024


“2. Statically vs 
Dynamically Typed”
<EOS>
“Memory Management: 
Python takes care of 
memory management for”
“JavaScript, on the other hand is”
“determined at runtime. 3. Object”
“Python has a 
vast collection of 
libraries"
“Here are some of 
the main differen”
<BOS>
Figure 1: RLHF model generations on the same prompt are highly similar to each other, unlike Base LMs. For
each of 80 short prompts, we collect and align 100 generations (nucleus sampling, p = 0.9) from Base (pretrained)
and RLHF models. Above: (§4.3) A Sankey diagram of 100 RLHF model generations for the prompt “What are
the main differences between Python and JavaScript programming languages?” Sequences share multiple lengthy
anchor spans which appear verbatim in the same order, forming a uniform skeleton for nearly all generations.
Below: (§4.2) Over the sequence length, the number of generations aligned with at least 5 others, averaged over
all prompts. Base model generations maintain low levels of alignment. RLHF model generations exhibit high
alignment throughout, but especially near the beginning and end of generations.
2
Agent models aren’t general language
models anymore
Many current language models begin as world mod-
els, trained to accurately predict the probabilities of
possible events in a medium (i.e. text), and are later
adapted as agent models–trained to interact with
users towards specific goals. While agent models,
particularly those trained with RLHF, are unpar-
alleled as interactive dialogue agents, we show in
this section that such adaptation diminishes the
original ability to world model, i.e., provide accu-
rate estimated probabilities of text. Our analysis
shows that agent models significantly underper-
form the Base LMs they are trained from on a set
of language modeling tasks across diverse domains
(§2.1). Even when re-trained towards language
modeling (§2.2), they fail to match Base models,
suggesting a potential trade-off between the abili-
ties of agent and world models.
2.1
Perplexity of Base vs. RLHF models
The ability to accurately predict the what will hap-
pen next given arbitrary starting conditions (i.e., to
world model) can be evaluated in the text domain
as performance on next-token prediction with the
perplexity metric. We evaluate the perplexity of
the Base models against their agent model counter-
parts. We focus on RLHF as a means of producing
agent models, as this is the most popular and ef-
fective approach currently being used. Specifically,
we analyze two Base models: Llama 2 (Touvron
et al., 2023) and OLMo (Groeneveld et al., 2024).
For their RLHF adaptations, we employ Tulu 2
(Ivison et al., 2023) and Llama 2 Chat (Touvron
et al., 2023) for Base Llama 2, and OLMo RLHF
for the Base OLMo. We consider common pre-
training corpora such as C4 (Roberts et al., 2019),
Arxiv (Clement et al., 2019), and Wikipedia for
evaluation. To test generalization to new data, we
also use new corpora released post-model develop-
ment including new Arxiv papers and BBC news
stories (Li et al., 2023b). Furthermore, we incor-
porate instruction finetuning data like Humpback
(Li et al., 2023a) and chat assistant data such as
OASST1 (Köpf et al., 2024), Anthropic Harmless
and Helpful corpora (Bai et al., 2022).
Results in Figure 2 (A) show that agent models
perform consistently worse than the Base models
that they were adapted from at language model-
ing. On standard test sets crawled directly from the
broader internet (e.g., C4) or specific domains (e.g.,
Arxiv) this is not a surprising result: RLHF models


(A)
(B)
Figure 2: (§2.1) RLHF models are significantly worse on language modeling tasks compared to the Base LMs
they are adapted from, even on data similar to their preference tuning corpora. (A): Perplexity increase in
models post-RLHF compared to the base LLM, across several model families and sizes, evaluated on 9 text corpora
grouped into 4 categories. RLHF models consistently underperform the Base models they were tuned from. (The
lower the perplexity, the better.) (B): We finetune each model from (A) on the target corpus; the general trend
remains unchanged. RLHF models are consistently inferior even post-finetuning. Details in Appendix E.
are trained to produce specific distributions, and
thus are no longer good density estimators of the
language model pretraining data distribution. How-
ever, we show that this holds true even on instruc-
tion tuning and chat assistant datasets which are
exclusively aimed at capturing the action-focused
data that current RLHF models are trained towards.
RLHF models are poor zero-shot language mod-
els, even on distributions they are trained to imitate,
suggesting that they are doing something other than
simply capturing these distributions. Indeed, this
is not the goal of using RLHF, but it raises a ques-
tion: what are RLHF models actually doing? In
§3 we argue that RLHF models shift their distri-
bution towards a space that can reliably produce
high-reward responses via implicit blueprints. This
limits the generality of predictions from language
models adapted to be agent models. In other words:
adapting models to become agent models reduces
their capacity as world models.
2.2
Readaptation via Finetuning
While RLHF certainly warps the distribution of
LLMs to be worse predictors, is this merely a
surface-level change? Is the next-token-prediction
still hidden within the weights of the adapted
model? Perhaps the information for arbitrary next
token prediction is simply unused in the output lay-
ers of RLHF models. Fully addressing this concern
is beyond the scope of this paper, but we present
evidence that it is at least not trivial to recover the
next-token-prediction capabilities of RLHF models.
To test this hypothesis we continue to pretrain both
Base models and RLHF models on the training sets
of the evaluation corpora used in §2.1.
The results in Figure 2 (B) show that it is diffi-
cult to recover the original ability of RLHF models
to act as world models. Note that this remains
true even for instruction tuning and chat assistant
corpora, which much more closely match the dis-
tribution that agent models have been adapted to.
Further evidence that RLHF models are not even
good rankers of likely text is shown in Appendix D
via the Shannon Game (Hovy and Lin, 1998).
3
Agent models concentrate probability
Past work (Shumailov et al., 2023) has suggested
that RLHF models collapse their probability distri-
butions, assigning high probability to a small set
of tokens rather than a smoother distribution as ob-
served in Base language models. In this section we
quantify some properties of this collapse, leading
us to propose that RLHF concentrates model proba-
bility onto text that is predictable by the model, yet
still diverse and high quality. This will be an impor-
tant point in §4 when we discuss how agent models
appear to have implicit blueprints for generating
text by narrowing the scope of possible futures, par-
ticularly onto self-predictable text that could make
structuring long-form text easier.
Figure 3 shows how concentrated different
model distributions are, measured as the proba-
bility mass assigned to the most probable k tokens
on gold vs. generated data. The most top-heavy
distribution is very clearly RLHF on its own sam-
pled generations, e.g., the average probability of
the highest probability token in RLHF when con-
ditioning on its own generated text is nearly 0.9


Figure 3: (§3) RLHF models assign nearly all of the
next-token probability mass to a single token, more
than Base models. For Base and RLHF models, we
calculate the next-token probability distributions on the
gold sequences, as well as on the models’ own genera-
tions (nucleus sampling, p=0.9). We show the cumula-
tive probability mass of the tokens sorted in descending
order of probability. RLHF models assign a larger por-
tion of the probability mass to a small number of tokens,
compared to Base models. Details are in Appendix E.3.
Figure 4: (§3) RLHF models assign near-zero prob-
ability mass to almost all tokens when generating,
more than Base models. For both 7B and 70B models,
RLHF models assign non-negligible (> 10−8) prob-
ability to significantly fewer vocabulary tokens when
predicting next tokens from its own generations (nu-
cleus sampling, p = 0.9), but slightly more tokens when
predicting next tokens on gold text sequences. This sug-
gests RLHF models only exhibit collapse in their own
generative distributions. Details are in Appendix E.3.
whereas it is well below 0.7 for both Base model
setups. Interestingly, it is not only for RLHF vs.
Base models that we see a noticeable gap, but also
RLHF models conditioned on gold vs. generated
data. When RLHF models are conditioned on their
generated text, they become extremely confident,
suggesting that RLHF models remain in a region
of confidence once generation has started.
We can also consider the converse: how diffuse
model distributions are, measured by how many
tokens are assigned non-negligible probability. Fig-
ure 4 displays the average number of vocabulary
items with greater than 10−8 probability per time-
step; in other words, the average number of tokens
with a non-trivial probability of being sampled at
generation time, which we can also think of as a
rough measure of generative uncertainty. As the fig-
ure shows, RLHF models have vocabulary distribu-
tions that tend to be slightly heavier tailed (more un-
certain) on human authored data, but much lighter
tailed (less uncertain) when conditioned on their
own generated text. Interestingly, Base models do
not differ as drastically between human authored
gold data and their own generations, and RLHF
on gold data is similar to Base model uncertainty
but slightly more uncertain than Base models. The
fact that RLHF models have such low uncertainty
on their own data, but otherwise very high uncer-
tainty, suggests that they are highly self-conditional
and adapted to predicting their own distributions,
limiting diversity but allowing for long-term pre-
dictability that can aid long-form generation. We
explore what this predictability looks like in §4.
The self-predictability of RLHF models is not
merely explained by the low diversity of RLHF
models. Adjusting Llama 2 70B RLHF (with nu-
cleus sampling, p=0.9) to be roughly as diverse as
Llama 2 70B Base (see ngram statistics in Table 4),
we still find Llama 2 70B Base is less confident,
even on its own greedy generations (see Figure 16
in Appendix). In effect, RLHF models seem to
be better at self-prediction, even accounting for
diversity.
These results suggest that RLHF models may be
staying within a region of confidence when they
generate text, in turn allowing for better long-form
coherency. It seems that agent models are signifi-
cantly better at predicting their own generated text
than next token predictors, which is verified in Fig-
ure 5. This naturally leads to the hypothesis that
this kind of high confidence is required to think
ahead for long-form generation (§4), suggesting a
deeper tradeoff between acting and predicting.


Figure 5: (§3) RLHF models have lower perplexity
when evaluated on their own generations: We gener-
ate (nucleus sampling, p=0.9) completions of prefixes
taken from 11 datasets, grouped into 4 categories. De-
tails are in Appendix 3.
4
Agent models think ahead
We have shown that RLHF models are no longer
good next token predictors and that they concen-
trate their probability distributions into more pre-
dictable outcomes. What does this probability mass
shift lead to? In this section we show evidence
that RLHF models make use of a kind of implicit
blueprint for long-form generation rather than pre-
dicting only one token in advance, effectively using
probability concentrated on certain future spans to
enable “thinking ahead” in long form generation.
4.1
RLHF hidden states are more predictive
of future tokens
As a basic measure of “thinking ahead”, we first
estimate the information models have about fu-
ture timesteps, beyond the next token. Using the
methodology of Pal et al. (2023), we study how
well we can predict tokens for Llama 2 7B Base
and RLHF models by leveraging their own hidden
states with a linear probe. Specifically, we perform
evaluation on the Pile (Gao et al., 2020) and An-
thropic Helpful (Bai et al., 2022) datasets. We train
a linear model on the hidden representation from
the 28th layer (Llama 2 7B comprises 32 layers),
using 100,000 tokens from each dataset, to predict
tokens n steps into the future (n = 1, 2, 3), after
the token being predicted at the current timestep.
We use this prediction accuracy as a metric to as-
sess the effectiveness of using a model’s hidden
state to foresee its own generation of future tokens.
Linear probes on RLHF models can predict fu-
ture tokens in their own generations with higher ac-
curacy than Base models (Figure 6). RLHF adapted
models find it easier to predict the future because
they generate a future that is more predictable, as
Figure 6: (§4.1) The intermediate representations of
RLHF models contain more linearly extractible in-
formation for predicting future tokens of generated
text, compared to Base models. We train a linear probe
to predict each model’s future tokens (n = 1, 2, 3 tokens
into the future) given the hidden representation. Each
subplot indicates probe accuracy at predicting the model-
generated token n steps in the future. Top uses prompts
from the Pile, and Bottom uses prompts from the An-
thropic Helpful dataset. Left predicts the model’s own
generation, while Right predicts for the other model
(e.g. RLHF predicting Base and vice versa).
supported by Figure 5.
Figure 6 also shows that RLHF models may con-
tain a subset of information that base LLMs do, as
base LLMs are more effective at predicting future
tokens of RLHF models than the reverse. This sup-
ports the idea of concentration or collapse in RLHF
models, as their generations fit Base LLMs, but
they no longer explain Base LLM generations as
effectively.
4.2
Sampled generations contain align-able
blueprints
RLHF models seem to construct implicit blueprints
for a given prompt, consistently touching on cer-
tain points across different samples. Sampling 100
continuations for the same prompt from an RLHF
model leads to sequences with a significant amount
of diversity (in terms of unique ngrams), but a
surprisingly high amount of overlap between the
sequences. While diversity and overlap may seem
to be in conflict, Figure 7 shows this is not the case.
We can use nucleus sampling (Holtzman et al.,
2020) to generate text with similar ngram diversity
across Base LLMs and RLHF-adapted models by
setting the value of p appropriately (see Appendix
E.4). Yet even when diversity statistics are similar,


(A)
(B)
Figure 7: (§4.2) Given a short prompt, RLHF models heavily reuse n-grams across many independently
generated continuations (nucleus sampling, p = 0.9), with the most common 10-grams appearing in 60% of
generations on average. For each of 80 short prompts, we collect 100 generations from Base and RLHF models
using nucleus sampling with p = 0.7 and p = 0.9, respectively. (A) For each prompt, the number of generations,
out of 100 total, which contain the most common n-gram (n ∈[5, 10, 25, 50]), averaged across all prompts. (B) A
histogram, binning 10-grams by the number of sequences containing that 10-gram. Counts are log-scale. Compared
to Base models, RLHF models much more frequently generate the same 10-gram in nearly all continuations for a
prompt. Statistics for other models are available in Appendix C.
RLHF models reuse more long ngrams across dif-
ferent generations for the same prompt than models
not trained using Reinforcement Learning. In ef-
fect, the diversity is not evenly distributed in RLHF
generation, with diversity concentrated in between
long, predictable spans.
In Figure 7, on average a quarter of RLHF out-
puts share at least one 25-gram (about a sentence),
and there are almost twice as many RLHF se-
quences sharing at least a 10-gram than for the
Base model. This high level of ngram sharing is
not limited to a few isolated cases or to the prefix
or suffix of the generations. The bar-chart on the
right side of Figure 7 (B) shows that on average
10-grams are shared by more sequences in RLHF
model outputs by a large margin (note log-scale).
However, ngram statistics are not robust to
small variations, nor do they consider ordering ef-
fects—where ngrams in RLHF models tend to oc-
cur in certain orders. To handle these problems,
we propose to first align the continuations for a
given prompt using a sequence alignment method
originally developed for bioinformatics, MAFFT
(Katoh and Standley, 2013).
After aligning 100 continuations for each prompt
(Figure 1 bottom), Base models have a much lower
overlap compared to RLHF models despite hav-
ing controlled for ngram diversity using the nu-
cleus sampling parameter p, as described in Ap-
pendix E.4. RLHF models have significantly more
overlap for all positions, and at the beginning and
end of the sequences the overlap is even more dras-
tic. This shows that RLHF models tend to converge
back towards the end of the generations. Addition-
ally, we note that the larger standard deviations
(shaded in the figure) result from the fact that the
convergence points occur at different positions in
the sequences for different prompts. These results
hold true across different models, see Appendix B.
4.3
Anchor spans as an implicit blueprint
Visualizing these alignments suggests that RLHF
models seem to blueprint generations, consistently
using the same key points across many generations
for a given prompt (Figure 1 top). Base LLMs
show no such structure (Figure 8 bottom).
We visualize these blueprints with Sankey dia-
grams (Figure 1 top), which characterize the flow
through critical nodes over a sequential process.
We focus on “anchor spans”—substrings that oc-
cur across many sampled outputs for the same
prompt—such that the flow between two nodes
A and B represents the set of generations which
contain A, followed by B, with (possibly different)
text in between. Specifically, we first identify all
text spans of a fixed minimum length (30 charac-
ters) that occur at the same index in the alignments
found in §4.2, for at least some threshold number of
generations (20%). If the same span occurs at two
different positions in the alignment indexing, they
are counted as different spans. We sort the spans in
descending order of frequency across unique out-
puts, and then by span length. We then greedily
pick up to a maximum (6 in these visualizations)


“CRISPRCas9 
technology also 
raise”
“can be used to 
introduce desirable 
traits”
“can be used to treat 
genetic diseases”
“potential 
applications
include”
“to study the function 
of specific genes”
<EOS>
<BOS>
Llama 2 70B RLHF, Nucleus Sampling, p=0.9
<EOS>
<BOS>
Llama 2 70B Base, Nucleus Sampling, p=0.7
Figure 8: (§4.3) The RLHF model (top) shows multiple anchor spans appearing verbatim in the same order,
whereas the Base model (bottom) lacks any common anchored points, highlighting the divergence of its
generated responses. Each Sankey diagram visualizes 100 responses (nucleus sampling, p = 0.9 for RLHF and
p = 0.7 for Base) to the prompt “Explain the process of gene editing using CRISPR-Cas9 technology, and discuss
its potential applications and ethical implications.”
number of spans, updating the occurrence counts
for unpicked spans after each addition, so that gen-
erations cannot “double count” for spans which
overlap. See Appendix E.4 for further details.
RLHF models seem to blueprint their long-form
generations: Figure 8 (top) shows that anchor spans
remain constant across many outputs, analogous to
a bullet point outline embedded within a generation.
For the same prompt the Base model (Llama 2 70B)
has no such structure whatsoever, even when using
a more restricted sampling strategy (Figure 8 bot-
tom). In other words, RLHF models produce an
implicit blueprint, converging to certain spans from
which they can reliably predict their own future,
while Base models diverge in unpredictable ways
(more examples Appendix A), even when adjusting
for diversity.
5
Is this a fundamental trade-off?
Are these differences in world models and agent
models fundamental, or just a result of current lan-
guage model training and RLHF practices? Even
if new agent adaptation methods alleviate some of
these problems, we propose that, under fixed ca-
pacity, there must necessarily be some trade-off
between world models and agent models because
of the underlying differences in their optimal be-
havior, which we are more closely approaching
with recent state-of-the-art methods.
5.1
Why can’t world models just be agent
models when we ask them to be?
Prompts almost never fully specify desired behav-
ior. Base LLMs have been trained to sample from
the space of possible documents with a given prefix.
In the overwhelming majority of cases, prefixes
do not fully specify many of the choices a doc-
ument can represent. Furthermore, Base LLMs
have been shown to be very sensitive to short-term
context (Paperno et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2023).
This is a feature, not a bug, of world models, as
short-term context is generally more predictive than
long-term context in human-authored documents.
Yet it means that Base LLMs are highly sensitive
to sampling even one incoherent token. Dziri et al.
(2024) suggest that the probability of generating an
error is lower bounded by the 1 −P(error)ℓwhere
ℓis the length of a document. The actual error rate
is likely much higher, as the model conditions on
previously made errors, creating a snowball effect,
as with hallucination (Zhang et al., 2023).
5.2
Planning around randomness
The ability for agents to plan well is directly related
to the amount of randomness in their environment.
Reinforcement Learning (RL) is the mathematical
language of agent modeling, so we take a moment
to conceptualize why RLHF models would collapse


and rely on anchor spans in terms of RL. Recall the
Bellman equation, describing the value of a current
state of a sequence of actions:
V (s) = max
a∈A
(
R(s, a) + γ
X
s′∈S
P(s′|s, a)V (s′)
)
(1)
where V is the value of state s, A is the set of pos-
sible actions, R is the reward function, 0 < γ < 1
is the discount factor, S is set of all possible states,
and P is the transition function. Note that if P
is uniform over S at every state regardless of ac-
tion, there is no need for planning at all: in a
purely stochastic environment, planning is impos-
sible. This holds true even if for a given state
s there are a limited subset of states Ss→⊂S
that have non-zero probability under P, because
P(s′|s, a1) = P(s′|s, a2) in all of these cases, i.e.,
the action an agent chooses to take has no effect on
the outcome, so planning is entirely unnecessary.
On the other extreme, if an agent can freely
choose their next state, e.g., ∀s ∈S, ∀s′
∈
Ss→, ∃as′ : P(s′|s, as′) = 1, where Ss→is the
set of reachable states from s, it will always do as
well or better than an environment with the same
connectivity but increased stochasticity:
max
a′∈A
X
s′∈S
P(s′|s, a)R(s′, a′) ≤max
a′∈A R(s′, a′)
(2)
Holding all else equal, a stochastic transition func-
tion means that even an optimal agent will some-
times enter a suboptimal solution due to incomplete
control over future states.
Base LLMs adapted with RLHF face a similar
conundrum to a highly stochastic transition func-
tion: they are forced to learn with a highly stochas-
tic initial policy πBase LLM in an environment
with a huge space of states and non-smooth dis-
tribution of rewards. Models therefore may tend
towards previously high-reward states (e.g. the an-
chor spans), as this is less risky than exploration.
In the exponentially large space of possible strings
it is unsurprising that models tend to converge to-
wards anchor spans.
Adapting LLMs for long-form generation incen-
tivizes the use of anchor spans, in order to avoid
entering states for which πBase LLM has high en-
tropy and is therefore hard to plan around. This
becomes exponentially harder to avoid as the length
of generated strings grows (Dziri et al., 2024). We
suggest that models converge to anchor spans to
lower-bound success, and will likely do so when
adapted from a vanilla next-token-predictor, even
with very different adaptation methods.
6
Related Work
Catastrophic Forgetting
Prior work examined
models forgetting previously learned distributions.
In most continual learning settings, where the
model continues to train on new data, this is termed
catastrophic forgetting (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017).
This phenomenon has been observed in Language
Models, and several mechanisms have been pro-
posed to mitigate its effects (Chen et al., 2020; Xu
et al., 2020; Vu et al., 2022). More recently, catas-
trophic forgetting has also been found to impact
modern generative LLMs (Luo et al., 2023).
Distribution collapse of LLMs
Distribution col-
lapse is known to occur in models which have been
trained on data distributions that include model
generations (Shumailov et al., 2023). Such self-
consuming models exhibit a degradation in gen-
eration quality as well as diversity (Briesch et al.,
2023; Alemohammad et al., 2023). Unlike these
works, which do not consider preference tuning
objectives at all, we focus on collapse in RLHF
models. Other works do consider RLHF models,
but do not study the nature of this collapse, instead
focusing exclusively on methods for alleviating the
style of mode collapse which arises from the de-
generative overfitting to an imperfect reward model
(Perez et al., 2022; Go et al., 2023). These meth-
ods are taken from the RL literature (Jaques et al.,
2017), and build on studies which find mode col-
lapse common in many other models (Che et al.,
2017; Mescheder et al., 2018).
Concurrent with our work, Lake et al. (2024)
show that RLHF appears to be collapsing onto a
subset of the Base LLM distribution, as we hy-
pothesize in §4.1, suggesting that RLHF has lower
diversity due to an aggregating effect that can be
partially (but not fully) mimicked with prompt-
ing. Xiao et al. (2024) also studies RLHF mod-
els, specifically on collapse at a preference level
over all generations. Our work, on the other hand,
visualizes and describes, quantitatively and quali-
tatively, the sequence-level multi-token repetition
in generations after RLHF, as characterized by the
presence of anchor spans.


7
Conclusion
We present evidence that: (1) RLHF-adapted LLMs
are no longer performant next-token predictors, and
thus no longer serve as world models of the textual
space. (2) Such models concentrate their probabil-
ity into a more predictable subdistribution of the
Base model. (3) RLHF LLMs consistently produce
anchor spans which can serve as a blueprint for
long-form generations.
We propose that these differences may indicate
a deeper trade-off between world models and agent
models. An agent model that takes action via sam-
pling might reshape its distribution in such a way
that it no longer represents the full set of possi-
bilities that world models capture, ensuring that it
doesn’t “go off the rails” as Base LLMs are prone
to. Future work could explore strategies that can
mitigate the observed trade-off between the predic-
tive capabilities of world models and the action-
oriented nature of agent models. For instance, a
system that decides when to call a world model vs.
an agent model may be able to more reliably switch
between these for different goals, using the world
model as a probabilistic simulator and predictor
that helps the agent model decide how to act.
Limitations
One key limitation of our work that will need to
be addressed in future literature is comprehensive-
ness across a broader range of models, as well as
varied methods for agent-alignment. We focus on
RLHF here as this is the most popular and success-
ful method currently being used. We also aimed
to test popular and performant models, as these
represent the limits of both RLHF and base LM
capabilities. In future work, it will be important to
study more various models, including more model
scales. It will also be useful to include multiple
random seeds for training/tuning in all experiments,
but the cost of such experiments would be infeasi-
ble here.
It will also be useful in future work to study
the blueprints produced by RLHF models in more
detail. This work aims to both demonstrate the
trade-off between agent and world modeling, then
explore different aspects of this blueprinting. How-
ever, dedicated work will be required to fully char-
acterize this process.
Ethical Considerations
Aligned models, such as those tuned with RLHF,
have seen a recent explosion in capabilities, pop-
ularity, and deployment compared to traditional
LLMs trained primarily on broad text prediction.
As part of this shift, aligned models are much more
frequently framed as “agents” which can take ex-
plicit actions, and take active part in human-facing
systems. This framing poses significant risks with-
out a better conceptual understanding of these tech-
niques, particularly with respect to whether these
models are indeed robust agents and what underly-
ing learned mechanisms might allow for this.
Our work seeks to contribute to this understand-
ing. For example, we find some evidence that
aligned models may indeed be planning, which
supports a notion of “agentiveness”. Yet we also
find that these models lose robust and accessible
notions of calibrated text prediction, which could
indicate a tendency towards biased heuristics or
at least away from the more robust, broad-text un-
derstanding of traditional LMs. Overall, our work
indicates ongoing concerns with treating aligned
models as well-informed agents, and demands fur-
ther study into these aspects and risks.


References
Sina Alemohammad, Josue Casco-Rodriguez, Lorenzo
Luzi, Ahmed Imtiaz Humayun, Hossein Babaei,
Daniel LeJeune, Ali Siahkoohi, and Richard G Bara-
niuk. 2023. Self-consuming generative models go
mad. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.01850.
Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda
Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain,
Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al.
2022. Training a helpful and harmless assistant with
reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2204.05862.
Martin Briesch, Dominik Sobania, and Franz Rothlauf.
2023. Large language models suffer from their own
output: An analysis of the self-consuming training
loop. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.16822.
Tong Che, Yanran Li, Athul Jacob, Yoshua Bengio,
and Wenjie Li. 2017. Mode regularized generative
adversarial networks. In International Conference
on Learning Representations.
Sanyuan Chen, Yutai Hou, Yiming Cui, Wanxiang Che,
Ting Liu, and Xiangzhan Yu. 2020. Recall and learn:
Fine-tuning deep pretrained language models with
less forgetting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.12651.
Wei-Lin Chiang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Ying Sheng,
Zhanghao Wu, Hao Zhang, Lianmin Zheng, Siyuan
Zhuang, Yonghao Zhuang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Ion
Stoica, and Eric P. Xing. 2023. Vicuna: An open-
source chatbot impressing gpt-4 with 90%* chatgpt
quality.
Colin B. Clement, Matthew Bierbaum, Kevin P.
O’Keeffe, and Alexander A. Alemi. 2019. On the use
of arxiv as a dataset. Preprint, arXiv:1905.00075.
Nouha Dziri, Ximing Lu, Melanie Sclar, Xiang Lor-
raine Li, Liwei Jiang, Bill Yuchen Lin, Sean Welleck,
Peter West, Chandra Bhagavatula, Ronan Le Bras,
et al. 2024. Faith and fate: Limits of transformers on
compositionality. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 36.
Leo Gao, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Laurence Gold-
ing, Travis Hoppe, Charles Foster, Jason Phang, Ho-
race He, Anish Thite, Noa Nabeshima, et al. 2020.
The Pile: An 800GB dataset of diverse text for lan-
guage modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.00027.
Dongyoung Go, Tomasz Korbak, Germán Kruszewski,
Jos Rozen, Nahyeon Ryu, and Marc Dymetman.
2023.
Aligning language models with prefer-
ences through f-divergence minimization. Preprint,
arXiv:2302.08215.
Dirk Groeneveld, Iz Beltagy, Pete Walsh, Akshita Bha-
gia, Rodney Kinney, Oyvind Tafjord, Ananya Harsh
Jha, Hamish Ivison, Ian Magnusson, Yizhong Wang,
et al. 2024. Olmo: Accelerating the science of lan-
guage models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.00838.
Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and
Yejin Choi. 2020. The curious case of neural text de-
generation. In International Conference on Learning
Representations.
Eduard Hovy and Chin-Yew Lin. 1998. Automated
text summarization and the summarist system. In
TIPSTER TEXT PROGRAM PHASE III: Proceedings
of a Workshop held at Baltimore, Maryland, October
13-15, 1998, pages 197–214.
Hamish Ivison, Yizhong Wang, Valentina Pyatkin,
Nathan Lambert, Matthew Peters, Pradeep Dasigi,
Joel Jang, David Wadden, Noah A Smith, Iz Belt-
agy, et al. 2023. Camels in a changing climate: En-
hancing lm adaptation with tulu 2. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.10702.
Natasha Jaques, Shixiang Gu, Dzmitry Bahdanau,
José Miguel Hernández-Lobato, Richard E. Turner,
and Douglas Eck. 2017. Sequence tutor: Conserva-
tive fine-tuning of sequence generation models with
KL-control. In Proceedings of the 34th International
Conference on Machine Learning, volume 70 of Pro-
ceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 1645–
1654. PMLR.
Kazutaka Katoh and Daron M Standley. 2013. Mafft
multiple sequence alignment software version 7: im-
provements in performance and usability. Molecular
biology and evolution, 30(4):772–780.
James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz,
Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins, Andrei A Rusu,
Kieran Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Ag-
nieszka Grabska-Barwinska, et al. 2017.
Over-
coming catastrophic forgetting in neural networks.
Proceedings of the national academy of sciences,
114(13):3521–3526.
Andreas Köpf, Yannic Kilcher, Dimitri von Rütte,
Sotiris Anagnostidis, Zhi Rui Tam, Keith Stevens,
Abdullah Barhoum, Duc Nguyen, Oliver Stan-
ley, Richárd Nagyfi, et al. 2024.
Openassistant
conversations-democratizing large language model
alignment. Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems, 36.
Thom Lake, Eunsol Choi, and Greg Durrett. 2024.
From distributional to overton pluralism: Investigat-
ing large language model alignment. arXiv [cs.CL].
Xian Li, Ping Yu, Chunting Zhou, Timo Schick, Omer
Levy, Luke Zettlemoyer, Jason E Weston, and Mike
Lewis. 2023a. Self-alignment with instruction back-
translation. In The Twelfth International Conference
on Learning Representations.
Yucheng Li, Frank Guerin, and Chenghua Lin. 2023b.
Avoiding data contamination in language model eval-
uation: Dynamic test construction with latest materi-
als. Preprint, arXiv:2312.12343.
Yun Luo, Zhen Yang, Fandong Meng, Yafu Li, Jie
Zhou, and Yue Zhang. 2023. An empirical study


of catastrophic forgetting in large language mod-
els during continual fine-tuning.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2308.08747.
Lars Mescheder, Andreas Geiger, and Sebastian
Nowozin. 2018. Which training methods for GANs
do actually converge? In Proceedings of the 35th
International Conference on Machine Learning, vol-
ume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Re-
search, pages 3481–3490. PMLR.
Koyena Pal, Jiuding Sun, Andrew Yuan, Byron C Wal-
lace, and David Bau. 2023. Future lens: Anticipating
subsequent tokens from a single hidden state. In Pro-
ceedings of the 27th Conference on Computational
Natural Language Learning (CoNLL), pages 548–
560.
Denis Paperno, Germán Kruszewski, Angeliki Lazari-
dou, Ngoc Quan Pham, Raffaella Bernardi, Sandro
Pezzelle, Marco Baroni, Gemma Boleda, and Raquel
Fernandez. 2016. The LAMBADA dataset: Word
prediction requiring a broad discourse context. In
Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers), pages 1525–1534, Berlin, Germany.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Ethan Perez, Saffron Huang, Francis Song, Trevor Cai,
Roman Ring, John Aslanides, Amelia Glaese, Nat
McAleese, and Geoffrey Irving. 2022. Red teaming
language models with language models. Preprint,
arXiv:2202.03286.
Adam Roberts, Colin Raffel, Katherine Lee, Michael
Matena, Noam Shazeer, Peter J. Liu, Sharan Narang,
Wei Li, and Yanqi Zhou. 2019. Exploring the limits
of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text trans-
former. Technical report, Google.
Ilia Shumailov,
Zakhar Shumaylov,
Yiren Zhao,
Yarin Gal, Nicolas Papernot, and Ross Anderson.
2023.
The curse of recursion: Training on gen-
erated data makes models forget.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.17493.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Al-
bert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti
Bhosale, et al. 2023.
Llama 2:
Open founda-
tion and fine-tuned chat models.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.09288.
Tu Vu, Aditya Barua, Brian Lester, Daniel Cer, Mo-
hit Iyyer, and Noah Constant. 2022. Overcoming
catastrophic forgetting in zero-shot cross-lingual gen-
eration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.12647.
Xingyao Wang, Zihan Wang, Jiateng Liu, Yangyi Chen,
Lifan Yuan, Hao Peng, and Heng Ji. 2023. Mint:
Evaluating llms in multi-turn interaction with tools
and language feedback. In The Twelfth International
Conference on Learning Representations.
Jiancong Xiao, Ziniu Li, Xingyu Xie, Emily Getzen,
Cong Fang, Qi Long, and Weijie J. Su. 2024. On the
algorithmic bias of aligning large language models
with rlhf: Preference collapse and matching regular-
ization. Preprint, arXiv:2405.16455.
Ying Xu, Xu Zhong, Antonio Jose Jimeno Yepes, and
Jey Han Lau. 2020. Forget me not: Reducing catas-
trophic forgetting for domain adaptation in reading
comprehension. In 2020 International Joint Confer-
ence on Neural Networks (IJCNN), pages 1–8. IEEE.
Muru Zhang, Ofir Press, William Merrill, Alisa
Liu, and Noah A Smith. 2023.
How language
model hallucinations can snowball. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.13534.
Chunting Zhou, Pengfei Liu, Puxin Xu, Srini Iyer, Jiao
Sun, Yuning Mao, Xuezhe Ma, Avia Efrat, Ping Yu,
LILI YU, Susan Zhang, Gargi Ghosh, Mike Lewis,
Luke Zettlemoyer, and Omer Levy. 2023. LIMA:
Less is more for alignment. In Thirty-seventh Con-
ference on Neural Information Processing Systems.
A
Sankey Diagrams
Figures 9, 10, 11, 12 show further Sankey Dia-
grams—sampled at random from the 80 Vicuna
prompts.


Llama 2 70B RLHF, Nucleus Sampling, p=0.9
Llama 2 70B Base, Nucleus Sampling, p=0.7
Llama 2 7B RLHF, Nucleus Sampling, p=0.9
Llama 2 7B Base, Nucleus Sampling, p=0.7
Figure 9: (§4.3) Further examples of Sankey diagrams, as in Figure 8. Each Sankey diagram visualizes 100
responses (nucleus sampling, p = 0.9 for RLHF and p = 0.7 for Base) to the prompt “What are the most effective
ways to deal with stress?”


Llama 2 70B RLHF, Nucleus Sampling, p=0.9
Llama 2 70B Base, Nucleus Sampling, p=0.7
Llama 2 7B RLHF, Nucleus Sampling, p=0.9
Llama 2 7B Base, Nucleus Sampling, p=0.7
Figure 10: (§4.3) Further examples of Sankey diagrams, as in Figure 8. Each Sankey diagram visualizes 100
responses (nucleus sampling, p = 0.9 for RLHF and p = 0.7 for Base) to the prompt “What are the main differences
between Python and JavaScript programming languages?”


Llama 2 70B RLHF, Nucleus Sampling, p=0.9
Llama 2 70B Base, Nucleus Sampling, p=0.7
Llama 2 7B RLHF, Nucleus Sampling, p=0.9
Llama 2 7B Base, Nucleus Sampling, p=0.7
Figure 11: (§4.3) Further examples of Sankey diagrams, as in Figure 8. Each Sankey diagram visualizes 100
responses (nucleus sampling, p = 0.9 for RLHF and p = 0.7 for Base) to the prompt “How can I increase my
productivity while working from home?”


Llama 2 70B RLHF, Nucleus Sampling, p=0.9
Llama 2 70B Base, Nucleus Sampling, p=0.7
Llama 2 7B RLHF, Nucleus Sampling, p=0.9
Llama 2 7B Base, Nucleus Sampling, p=0.7
Figure 12: (§4.3) Further examples of Sankey diagrams, as in Figure 8. Each Sankey diagram visualizes 100
responses (nucleus sampling, p = 0.9 for RLHF and p = 0.7 for Base) to the prompt “Can you explain the basics of
quantum computing?”


B
Overlap Graphs
Figure 13 plots the same overlap metrics as Fig-
ure 1 (top), but for more models. Figure 14 shows
that these metrics show a similar story when mea-
suring the proportion of sequences that participate
in anchor spans (see §4.3) rather than looking at
string alignment directly.


Figure 13: RLHF model generations on the same prompt are highly similar to each other, unlike Base
LMs. For each of 80 short prompts, we collect and align 100 generations (nucleus sampling, p = 0.9) from Base
(pretrained) and RLHF models. (§4.2) Over the sequence length, the number of generations aligned with at least
5 others, averaged over all prompts. Base model generations maintain low levels of alignment. RLHF model
generations exhibit high alignment throughout. Above: (§4.3) LLMs with 7B parameters Below: LLMs with 70B
parameters.
Figure 14: RLHF model generations on the same prompt are highly similar to each other, unlike Base
LMs. For each of 80 short prompts, we collect and align 100 generations (nucleus sampling, p = 0.9) from Base
(pretrained) and RLHF models. (§4.2) While Figures 1 and 14 look at alignment on raw characters, these diagrams
show that when considering directly what proportion of sequences are part of an anchor span (see §4.3) the pattern
remains. Above: (§4.3) LLMs with 7B parameters Below: LLMs with 70B parameters.


C
Ngram Charts
Figure 15 shows the same statistics as Figure 7 for
further models.


(A)
(B)
Figure 15: (§4.2) Given a short prompt, RLHF models heavily reuse n-grams across many independently
generated continuations (nucleus sampling, p = 0.9), with the most common 10-gram appearing in 60% of
generations on average. For each of 80 short prompts, we collect 100 generations from Base and RLHF models
using nucleus sampling with p = 0.7 and p = 0.9, respectively. (A) For each prompt, the number of generations,
out of 100 total, which contain the most common n-gram (n ∈[5, 10, 25, 50]), averaged across all prompts. (B) A
histogram, binning 10-grams by the number of sequences containing that 10-gram. Counts are log-scale. Compared
to Base models, RLHF models much more frequently generate the same 10-gram in nearly all continuations for a
prompt.


D
Shannon Game
What if the ranking information about which tokens
are more or less likely is still preserved in RLHF
models, even if the probabilities themselves are
distorted? The perplexities RLHF adapted LLMs
yield are higher, but this could be potentially be
a result of the distribution collapse RLHF models
undergo (see §3). To evaluate how well LLMs rank
the gold next token, we evaluate both Base and
RLHF models using the Shannon Game.
Experimental setup
The Shannon Game (Hovy
and Lin, 1998), is a next token prediction task, ex-
cept no probabilities are used. Instead, models are
judged by the number of incorrect guesses that a
model ranks with a higher score over the target
token. The Shannon Game is invariant to relative
differences in exactly how much probability is al-
located to different strings, and is only sensitive to
the ordering that tokens are given in the hypothesis.
We evaluate the Base Llama 2 and RLHF Llama 2
(the Chat version) on LAMBADA (Paperno et al.,
2016), a collection of narrative passages designed
to test the ability of LLMs on predicting the final
word of a whole passage.
Results
Table 1 shows that this is not the case via
the Shannon Game, revealing that RLHF adapted
LLMs are worse at ranking possible next-tokens,
not just assigning them probability. Table 1 shows
that RLHF models are worse at the Shannon Game,
suggesting that the ability to model arbitrary as-
pects of the textual world are diminished by current
agent adaptation techniques.
While it is tempting to assume that this is merely
a result of imperfect RLHF methods, we argue that
this trade-off is inherent to agent-adaptation. To
generate multiple hundreds of tokens towards a sin-
gular goal, an agent model must limit the amount of
uncertainty about future tokens. Planning a coher-
ent document while marginalizing over all possible
paths is an exponentially harder problem then col-
lapsing onto a small set of possibilities. We hypoth-
esize that the long-form generation capabilities of
current RLHF models, are a general feature agent
models: limiting the subspace of possibilities for
any given prompt allows for better planning within
this subspace. Further evidence for this hypothesis
is given in §4.
Llama 2
Condition
EM
F1
Avg. guesses
7B
Base
68.41
70.31
7.62
RLHF
56.70
60.78
9.99
70B
Base
67.60
73.10
6.18
RLHF
66.47
67.50
8.64
Table 1: RLHF models are worse than Base models
at ranking possible next tokens on the LAMBADA
dataset (Paperno et al., 2016), requiring more incorrect
guesses to identify the correct token (Avg. guesses).
E
Experimental Setups
E.1
Perplexity Datasets
We list the corpora used in our perplexity experi-
ments (§2) in Table 2.
Table 2: Data used for perplexity experiments in §2
Category
Data
Pretraining
Wikipedia
C4 (Roberts et al., 2019)
Arxiv (Clement et al., 2019)
New Corpus
New BBC (Li et al., 2023b)
New Arxiv (Li et al., 2023b)
Instruction Data
Humpback (Li et al., 2023a)
Chat
Anthropic Harmless (Bai et al., 2022)
Anthropic Helpful (Bai et al., 2022)
OASST1 (Köpf et al., 2024)
E.2
Self-Perplexity Datasets
We list the corpora used in our self-perplexity ex-
periments (§3) in Table 3.
Table 3: Data used for self-perplexity experiments in §3
Category
Data
Pretraining
Wikipedia
C4 (Roberts et al., 2019)
Arxiv (Clement et al., 2019)
New Corpus
New BBC (Li et al., 2023b)
New Arxiv (Li et al., 2023b)
Instruction Data
Humpback (Li et al., 2023a)
LIMA (Zhou et al., 2023)
Chat
Anthropic Harmless (Bai et al., 2022)
Anthropic Helpful (Bai et al., 2022)
OASST1 (Köpf et al., 2024)
Vicuna (Chiang et al., 2023)


Figure 16: §3 RLHF models assign nearly all of the
next-token probability mass to a single token, more
than Base models. For Base and RLHF models, we
calculate the next-token probability distributions on the
gold sequences, as well as on the models’ own genera-
tions (nucleus sampling, p=0.9; and greedy). We show
the cumulative probability mass of the tokens, sorted in
descending order of probability. RLHF models assign
a larger portion of the probability mass to a very small
number of tokens, compared to Base models.
E.3
Setup for distribution collapse
experiments
To demonstrate agent model collapse, we checked
cumulative probability of the most probable k to-
kens (Figure 3) and percentage of non-negligible
vocabulary (Figure 4) for RLHF and Base models
on gold vs. their generations, averaged across the
diverse dataset used in Table 3.
E.4
Planning experiments
We use the Vicuna dataset (Chiang et al., 2023) as
a source of prompts and sample 100 continuations
for each of the prompts from both 7B and 70B Base
and RLHF models.
Diversity of ngrams vs.
nucleus sampling p.
We sample 100 continuations for each of the 80
prompts of the Vicuna dataset (Chiang et al., 2023)
and measure the proportion of unique ngrams (at
the token level) for different values of nucleus sam-
pling p. We find that setting nucleus sampling
p = 0.7 for Base models achieves a similar diver-
sity of ngrams as setting p = 0.9 for RLHF models.
We report results controlled for ngram diversity
by using these nucleus sampling values. Note that
when using the same nucleus sampling values, the
differences described are even more significant.
Alignment setup.
We employ the sequence align-
ment software MAFFT (Multiple Alignment us-
ing Fast Fourier Transform) (Katoh and Standley,
2013) to align the 100 continuations of each prompt
of the Vicuna dataset. The MAFFT software has a
“text” setting designed to align multiple sequences
with arbitrary characters. This is a method used in
bioinformatics to align three or more biological se-
quences (generally protein, DNA, or RNA). In sim-
ple terms, it’s a way of lining up these sequences to
identify regions of similarity. The problem of align-
ing multiple generations is not trivial and, like in
biological sequences, needs to handle deletions, in-
sertions, substitutions, and translocations of tokens
in the sequence. Biological alignment software is
designed to handle these operations. In fact, we
find MAFFT to be effective at aligning generations
which might deviate at points due to some phrases
being worded differently or omitted still often con-
verge back later.
The plot in Figure 1 was obtained by applying
MAFFT to the 100 generations for each prompt.
We removed any position in the aligned output that
was not shared by at least 5 sequences. We then
calculate overlap by measuring the proportion of
pairwise matches across sequences for each posi-
tion. Next we downsampled the resulting sequence
of overlap scores, which have varying lengths, to
100-dimensional sequence averaging correspond-
ing values. Finally, we averaged across all prompts
and applied a 1D Gaussian filter to smooth the
curves. The shaded areas indicate confidence inter-
vals for each position.


Model
Llama 2 70B
Llama 2 70B RLHF
ngrams
p=0.6
p=0.7
p=0.8
p=0.9
p=1.0
p=0.6
p=0.7
p=0.8
p=0.9
p=1.0
1
4.11%
5.12%
6.73%
9.20%
15.69%
3.35%
3.63%
3.89%
4.33%
5.39%
2
16.45%
21.34%
29.34%
41.04%
60.61%
13.18%
14.70%
16.00%
17.96%
22.59%
3
29.10%
37.56%
50.77%
68.09%
86.80%
23.67%
26.73%
29.24%
32.71%
40.36%
4
38.33%
48.54%
63.34%
80.78%
94.22%
32.03%
36.31%
39.77%
44.17%
53.23%
Model
Llama 2 7B
Llama 2 7B RLHF
ngrams
p=0.6
p=0.7
p=0.8
p=0.9
p=1.0
p=0.6
p=0.7
p=0.8
p=0.9
p=1.0
1
3.11%
4.15%
6.08%
9.34%
17.17%
3.06%
3.29%
3.67%
4.03%
5.42%
2
12.18%
17.29%
26.83%
42.26%
64.11%
12.51%
13.78%
15.67%
17.29%
23.08%
3
21.57%
30.66%
47.06%
70.26%
89.50%
23.43%
26.03%
29.64%
32.65%
42.14%
4
28.50%
39.79%
59.04%
82.79%
95.86%
32.62%
36.32%
41.21%
45.14%
56.26%
Table 4: Proportion of unique ngrams as a function of nucleus sampling p.
