METASPATIAL: REINFORCING 3D SPATIAL REASON-
ING IN VLMS FOR THE METAVERSE
Zhenyu Pan
Department of Computer Science
Northwestern University
zhenyupan@u.northwestern.edu
Han Liu
Department of Computer Science
Northwestern University
hanliu@northwestern.edu
ABSTRACT
We present MetaSpatial, the first reinforcement learning (RL) framework for
enhancing 3D spatial reasoning in vision-language models (VLMs), enabling real-
time 3D scene layout generation without post-processing. MetaSpatial addresses
two key challenges: (i) the need for extensive post-processing, as existing VLMs
lack inherent 3D spatial reasoning to generate realistic layouts; and (ii) the inef-
ficiency of supervised fine-tuning (SFT) for layout generation due to scarcity of
perfect annotations. Our core contribution is the 3D Spatial Policy Optimization
(3D-SPO) algorithm, which incorporates physics-aware modulation into advantage
estimates at the object level and trajectory-level reward from a training-only multi-
turn refinement pipeline. This design enhances temporal credit assignment and en-
courages spatially consistent policy learning. Empirical evaluations across models
of varying scales demonstrate that MetaSpatial improves spatial coherence, physical
plausibility, and formatting stability, leading to more realistic and functionally co-
herent object placements applicable to metaverse environments. Our code, data, and
training pipeline are publicly available at https://github.com/PzySeere/MetaSpatial.
1
INTRODUCTION
This work introduces MetaSpatial, the first RL-based framework designed to enhance the 3D spatial
reasoning capabilities of VLMs for 3D scene layout generation. It addresses two key challenges
in existing methods: (1) the need for extensive post-processing, due to the lack of internalized
3D spatial reasoning in VLMs, which limits their ability to generate realistic and coherent scene
layouts; and (2) the inherent limitations of SFT, which assumes a single "correct" layout. Since
spatial arrangements can vary widely based on context and user intent, SFT cannot cover underlying
distribution of plausible layouts, restricting model’s adaptability and generalization. In contrast,
MetaSpatial leverages RL to overcome SFT’s limitations, replacing fixed annotations with reward-
driven learning and eliminating the need for post-processing.
Existing approaches often struggle with physical plausibility, coherence, and structural consistency.
To address these challenges, some methods adopt multi-agent/round refinement, where LLMs refine
layouts through reasoning and search during inference (Tung & Yuan, 2007). However, they are
time-consuming and prone to deadlocks, where iterations fail to converge. Others leverage VLMs’
multi-modal reasoning with asset and room images to improve spatial arrangement, yet they still suffer
from inconsistencies and often require heavy post-processing such as differentiable optimization in
LayoutVLM (Sun et al., 2024). While SFT is proposed to reduce post-processing overhead (Sun et al.,
2024), its applicability to spatial reasoning is limited because layout generation lacks a definitive
ground truth—there is no single "correct" layout but a distribution of valid ones. This ambiguity arises
from two factors: (1) for the same room and user prompt, multiple arrangements can be equally valid
(e.g., sofa by the window vs. against the wall); and (2) spatial coordinates are continuous, so small
deviations that avoid collisions or violations remain acceptable. Since SFT depends on single-target
annotations, it fails to capture such diversity and continuity, limiting generalizable reasoning. In
contrast, RL is inherently well-suited for this task, as it learns from evaluative feedback rather than
static labels, optimizing for spatial plausibility under physics constraints and layout principles. By
replacing rigid supervision with adaptive learning, RL equips models with flexible spatial reasoning
and enables coherent and realistic 3D scenes without post-processing.
1
arXiv:2503.18470v2  [cs.CV]  4 Oct 2025


Input
A1
 -> (.blender and .png)
R1
Output
VLM - Rollout
Thinking process
A1(json)
</think>
</ans>
GPT-4V
Blender
VLM - Update
User 
Preference
Room Image
Objects
Status
A1
 -> Scene Graph
R2
R3
Physical Detection
A1 -> Json
Number of Objects same?
Name of objects same?
All objects has x,y,z ?
Format Detection
Multi-turn Refining
Figure 1: Overview of MetaSpatial framework. Given room images, user preferences, and object
status, the model generates a JSON-formatted layout with precise (x, y, z) coordinates and a reasoning
process. It evaluates the layout using three reward signals: Format Detection, Physical Detection, and
Rendering-based Evaluation. The RL updates are based on multiple multi-turn refinement trajectories,
optimizing a grouped policy via our 3D-SPO to learn deeper spatial reasoning.
To this end, we propose MetaSpatial, an RL-based training framework that equips VLMs with
generalizable 3D spatial reasoning for scene layout generation. MetaSpatial directly optimizes spatial
structures through interaction-driven rewards, enabling models to internalize physics constraints and
layout principles without relying on annotations or heavy post-processing. This yields more coherent,
efficient, and realistic layouts. Empirically, MetaSpatial improves both spatial plausibility and overall
layout quality, highlighting RL as a promising paradigm for scalable, real-time 3D scene generation.
As shown in Figure 1, given a room image, a user preference, and the existing objects’ status, the
VLM generates a reasoning trace with a JSON-formatted layout specifying object positions in (x, y,
z) coordinates. This layout is evaluated by three validation mechanisms to provide reward signals for
RL optimization: (1) Format Detection verifies structural validity by checking predicted objects
counts, ID consistency, and coordinate completeness; (2) Physical Detection converts the layout
into a scene graph to assess spatial constraints, collisions, and physical rules violations; and (3)
Rendering-based Evaluation renders a scene with predicted object coordinates and use a powerful
VLM (GPT-4o) to score plausibility, aesthetic coherence, and preference alignment. MetaSpatial
further employs a multi-turn training-only refinement pipeline, where each turn refines a layout based
on prior experiences to form an improvements trajectory. Rather than updating the policy based on
only trajectory-level rewards (Shao et al., 2024), we propose the 3D-SPO to integrate object-level
physics-informed modulation for 3D spatial reasoning. Specifically, 3D-SPO applies mask-aware
penalty adjustments to advantage estimates, targeting tokens for (x, y, z) coordinates. This allows the
RL to prioritize learning from physical spatial feedback rather than treating all tokens equally. By
grouping trajectories, 3D-SPO further stabilizes training and ensures advantage estimates capture
object-level spatial consistency and global reward trends, fostering deeper spatial reasoning.
In summary, our work makes the following key contributions:
• We introduce MetaSpatial, the first RL-based framework for enhancing 3D spatial reasoning
in VLMs, enabling coherent 3D scene layout generation without extensive post-processing.
• We propose 3D-SPO, a novel training schema that integrates object-level physics-aware mod-
ulation and trajectory-level reward aggregation from a training-only multi-turn refinement
pipeline, enhancing temporal credit assignment and spatially consistent policy learning.
• We design a three-level evaluation mechanism, incorporating format detection, physical
detection, and rendering-based assessment, providing adaptive reward signals for RL.
• Our extensive experiments show the effectiveness of our approach and the improvements in
spatial coherence, physical plausibility, and scene quality.
2


2
METHODOLOGY
In this section, we first formalize the task of 3D scene layout generation. We then provide an overview
of the MetaSpatial, highlighting its key components. Later, we detail each module within the RL
training pipeline, including layout generation via VLMs, the construction of multi-turn refinement
trajectories, reward design, and our core contribution—3D Spatial Policy Optimization (3D-SPO),
which leverages trajectory-level feedback to guide spatial policy learning.
2.1
PROBLEM FORMULATION
We aims to 3D scene layout generation to place a set of given 3D objects within a specified room
according to spatial constraints and user preferences. Formally, for each single data, given an input
consisting of a room image r, a list of object candidates O = {o1, o2, . . . , on} (each annotated with
category, size, and material), and optional user instructions u, the model is required to generate a 3D
layout l = {(oi, xi, yi, zi)}n
i=1, where each object is assigned a precise position (x, y, z).
This task is inherently ill-posed: for the same input, multiple valid layouts can satisfy both physical
and semantic constraints. As such, traditional SFT that relies on fixed annotations fails to capture the
diversity and adaptability required for realistic spatial reasoning. Instead, we model layout generation
as a policy learning problem, where a vision-language model πθ is optimized to generate semantically
meaningful and physically consistent layouts through interaction with a spatial feedback environment.
2.2
OVERVIEW OF THE METASPATIAL FRAMEWORK
As illustrated in Figure 1, MetaSpatial is an RL-based framework designed to enhance 3D spatial
reasoning in VLMs. The core idea is to enable VLMs to not only generate initial scene layouts via
inference but also iteratively refine them through multi-turn trajectories guided by structured reward
signals. Given a room image, a user preference, and objects metadata, the model produces both
a reasoning trace and a JSON-formatted layout prediction specifying precise (x, y, z) coordinates
for each object. The predicted layout is evaluated using three complementary reward functions: (1)
Format Detection, which verifies structural correctness such as object count, ID consistency, and
coordinate validity; (2) Physical Detection, which assesses physical feasibility by detecting object
collisions, boundary violations, and other physical constraints; and (3) Rendering-based Reward,
which renders the predicted layout and uses powerful VLM to score scene realism, aesthetic quality,
and alignment with user intent. Unlike conventional RL frameworks that rely on single-turn feedback,
MetaSpatial adopts a multi-turn training-only refinement pipeline, then generates multiple multi-
refinement trajectories of layout updates per sample. These trajectories are grouped and optimized
using our proposed 3D-SPO, which integrates object-level physics-informed modulation to prioritize
learning on coordinate tokens and trajectory-level reward aggregation to stabilize policy optimization.
2.3
LAYOUT GENERATION WITH VISION-LANGUAGE MODELS
At the core of our framework is a VLM πθ responsible for generating a structured 3D layout given
the input context. Specifically, for each single data, the model receives a visual prompt composed of:
(1) a rendered room image r that provides global spatial context; (2) a list of object specifications O
describing the target objects’ names, categories, sizes, and styles; and (3) optional user preferences u
in natural language (e.g., "place the dining table in the center of the room"). The VLM processes this
multimodal input and generates a roll-out rol combined with two components: (1) A reasoning trace
that reflects the model’s spatial thinking process in natural language, outlining the logic behind each
object placement; and (2) A JSON-formatted layout that encodes the final predicted positions for
each object. Then, our multi-turn training-only refinement pipeline evaluates and refines the layout to
generate a trajectory. Worth noting, the initial input image is a rendered empty room that serves only
as a blank spatial canvas, not as a supervision signal; in later turns, the generated scene is rendered
and fed back as visual context, enabling iterative refinement.
2.4
MULTI-TURN REFINEMENT TRAJECTORY GENERATION
Unlike traditional single-turn optimization, MetaSpatial introduces a multi-turn training-only refine-
ment pipeline that enables the model to iteratively improve layouts by reflecting on previous turns.
3


The motivation is distinct from prior multi-turn refinement methods applied during inference, although
such methods can still be optionally used after training. Formally, instead of generating a single-step
roll-out rol per sample, we produce a T-turn refinement trajectory T = {rol1, rol2, . . . , rolT },
where rol1 is the initial layout and subsequent roll-outs rolt (t > 1) update object placements
conditioned on the previous roll-out rolt−1 and its environment feedback. At each turn, the model
re-generates both a reasoning trace and a layout proposal, forming a sequence of progressively refined
outputs. To guide learning, we apply a discounted cumulative reward across the trajectory, assigning
higher weight to earlier turns. This encourages the model to produce a strong initial layout while still
benefiting from iterative refinement during training. These trajectories serve two purposes: (1) They
expose the model to diverse layout revisions, promoting structural adaptability and robust spatial
understanding; (2) They allow reward comparison not just across samples, but within refinement
paths, which is essential for the 3D-SPO strategy introduced later; and (3) They accelerate training by
providing multiple learning signals per sample, enabling faster convergence with fewer optimization
steps and reduced wall-clock time, demonstrated in experiments. This refinement-based approach
aligns with how humans iteratively adjust object arrangements in space and provides the necessary
supervision signal for layout optimization in the absence of absolute ground truth.
2.5
REWARD DESIGN
To guide RL without explicit annotations, MetaSpatial adopts a hybrid reward mechanism with three
complementary components—format, physical, and rendering—that jointly capture layout quality
and enable fine-grained spatial reasoning. To ensure efficient and stable training, we applied staged
tuning: format reward was emphasized early to address basic instruction-following (e.g., object
count, naming), physical reward was increased once format accuracy exceeded 0.9 to enhance spatial
reasoning, and rendering reward was introduced only in later stages due to its high runtime, refining
visual plausibility without slowing early training. We first extract a predicted layout lt from rolt at
step t, we define the total reward R(lt) as a weighted sum:
R(lt) = λ1Rformat + λ2Rphysics + λ3Rrender
(1)
(1) Format Reward. This component assesses whether the generated output adheres to the expected
structural format, including both syntactic and semantic validity. Instead of assigning a binary score,
we use a graded reward function that evaluates the following aspects: (a) Tag Structure Check:
If output mismatches the expected pattern: a reasoning trace enclosed in <think> tags and a
corresponding layout enclosed in <answer> tags, 0. (b) JSON Parsing Check: If the layout section
cannot be parsed into a valid JSON object, 0.1. (c) Object Count Consistency: If the number of
predicted objects mismatches the given objects, 0.5. (d) Name Alignment Check: If the predicted
object IDs misalign with the given objects, 0.5. (e) Coordinate Validity Check: If any generated
objects do not have valid x, y, and z coordinates, 0.5. (f) Full Match: If all checks pass, 1.
Formally, the format reward Rformat ∈{0, 0.1, 0.5, 1.0} is determined by parsing the model output
and applying a sequence of rule-based validators on both structure and content. This design allows
the model to receive meaningful gradients even for partially correct outputs, facilitating more stable
learning during early training stages.
(2) Physics Reward. To ensure that the generated layout adheres to fundamental physical constraints,
we simulate spatial arrangements by converting the predicted JSON layout into a scene graph and
performing rule-based physical checks. Two major types of violations are penalized: (a) Collision
Ratio: Measures the proportion of objects that intersect or overlap in space, computed via bounding
box intersection in 3D space. (b) Constraint Violation Ratio: Measures how often objects are placed
outside of allowable spatial bounds, such as floating in midair or extending beyond room boundaries.
The physics reward is computed as:
Rphysics = −α · CollisionRatio −β · ConstraintRatio
(2)
where α and β are weight factors (set to 0.2 by default). This component promotes physically valid
layouts and discourages unrealistic object placements.
(3) Rendering-based Reward. To assess the overall realism, functionality, and aesthetic coherence of
a generated scene, we adopt a rendering-based evaluation strategy using GPT-4o as a vision-language
judge. Specifically, the predicted layout is rendered into a 3D scene image using Blender, and
4


U
Policy
Model
Reward Model
Group Advantage
Simulate
Output 1
Output 2
Output G
...
Reference Model
Reward 1
Reward 2
Reward G
...
Advantage 1
Advantage 2
Advantage G
U
Policy
Model
Trajectory 1
Trajectory 2
Trajectory G
...
Advantage 1
Advantage 2
Advantage G
...
Turn t : Out 1
Turn t : Out 2
Turn t : Out G
...
Reward Model
Reference
Model
Object & Trajectory
Level 
Advantage Simulate
KL
T-turn Refinements
KL
GRPO
Multi-turn 3D-SPO
...
Figure 2: Comparison between Multi-turn 3D-SPO framework and standard GRPO. As highlighted
by the orange components, 3D-SPO introduces a multi-turn refinement pipeline that transforms each
single-step output in GRPO into a T-step trajectory with structured rewards. These trajectories are
aggregated and processed by our proposed dual-level advantage simulator, which embeds physics-
informed spatial penalties and produces advantage estimates at both the object and trajectory levels.
Thinking Process
</think>
</ans>
Output
{
"object_id":
"kitchen_island_1" ,
"x":3.0, "y":2.5,
"z":0.45
}
{
"object_id":
"hanging_pot_1"
,
"x":3.0, "y":2.5,
"z":0.65
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0 0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0.5*0.2+0.5*0.5
1 1
1
1
0.5*1+0.5*0.4
3D
Masking
Physics 
Penality
Collision Weight *(1-Collision Ratio of Object) i + Constraint Weight * (1-Constraint Ratio of Object i)
3D Spatial Advantage Calculation in 3D-SPO
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1 1
1
1
1
Final​ Reward = Raw Reward × (3D Masking × Physics Penality + (1 − 3D Masking) )
Raw
Reward
Figure 3: Advantage Calculation in 3D-SPO. Special weights are applied to tokens corresponding
to 3D coordinates. First, a 3D masking mechanism identifies all tokens representing the x, y, and z
positions of objects. For each object, a physics penalty is computed based on the collision ratio and
constraint ratio derived from the reward signal. These penalties are weighted and multiplied by the
original reward. All adjusted rewards are then normalized by subtracting the trajectory-level group
average and dividing by the standard deviation to deliver the final advantages.
the image is sent to GPT-4o along with the user’s textual preferences as shown in Appendix E.1.
The model is prompted to rate the layout across five human-aligned criteria: (1) Realism and 3D
Geometric Consistency; (2) Functionality and Activity-based Alignment; (3) Layout and Furniture
Appropriateness; (4) Color Scheme and Material Choices (we fixed this score due to the fixed objects
in setting); and (5) Overall Aesthetic and Atmosphere. Each category is graded on a scale from 1 to
10, and the final reward is computed as the normalized sum: Rrender =
1
50
P5
i=1 Gradei.
This high-level reward signal captures subjective qualities that are hard to model directly, such as
stylistic alignment and visual appeal, and serves as a proxy for human feedback in training.
2.6
MULTI-TURN 3D SPATIAL POLICY OPTIMIZATION (3D-SPO)
Inspired by GRPO (Shao et al., 2024), we propose the Multi-Turn 3D Spatial Policy Optimization
(3D-SPO) algorithm to optimize the policy model πθ. For each training sample, we parallelly
collect multiple refinement trajectories with their associated discounted rewards. 3D-SPO leverages
these grouped trajectories for relative reward comparisons, incorporates both trajectory-level and
object-level feedback, and focuses policy updates on generated 3D coordinates, thereby enhancing
spatial reasoning in both local and global aspects.
5


In detail, we generates G parallel refinement trajectories ζ = T1, T2, . . . , TG per input sample, where
each trajectory is defined as Tg = {rolg,1, . . . , rolg,T }, consisting of a sequence of layout versions.
Each layout lg,t extracted from rolg,t is assigned a composite reward R(lg,t) based on three factors:
format validity, physical plausibility, and aesthetic quality. Unlike prior work that uses last-turn
reward as final trajectory reward, we use a discounted cumulative reward as Rg = PT
i=1{γt·R(lg,t)},
where γ ∈(0, 1) is a decay factor that places greater emphasis on early layout quality. This design
ensures that earlier turns contribute more to the final reward than later ones, encouraging the model to
produce high-quality layouts as early as possible rather than relying on prolonged optimization. This
mechanism aims that longer sequences are not inherently favored, as late rewards are down-weighted.
As shown in Figure 3, we estimate the baseline from group scores instead of using the value model,
inspired by GRPO. In the advantage estimate, we first utilize a 3D masking mechanism to identify the
coordination tokens of all objects. For each object, we can get a physics penalty by the collision ratio
and constraint ratio derived from previous physical detection reward. Then, for coordinate tokens,
these penalties are weighted and multiplied by the original reward to provide a new trajectory-level
reward ˆRg. Non-coordinate tokens retain the original ones. This allows the model to focus more
on spatially important tokens (coordinates) while preserving trajectory- level consistency for other
tokens. After adjustments, we normalize them by subtracting the original group average reward µ and
dividing by the original standard deviation σ across the G trajectories. In our setting, the normalized
reward is used directly as the advantage for all tokens in i-th trajectory as ˆA3D
i,k = ( ˆRi,k −µ)/σ.
After the advantage estimate, we optimize the VLM policy πθ using our designed objective. We adapt
the original GRPO objective by incorporating our physics-aware advantage estimate ˆA3D
i,k as follows:
J3D-SP O(θ) = E[q ∼P(Q), {Ti}G
i=1 ∼πθold(ζ|q)]
1
G
G
X
i=1
1
|Ti|
|Ti|
X
k=1
n
min
h
rto(i,k) ˆA3D
i,k , clip
 rto(i,k), 1 −ϵ, 1 + ϵ
 ˆA3D
i,k
i
−βDKL [πθ||πref]
o
,
(3)
where rto(i,k) =
πθ(Ti,k|q,Ti,<k)
πθold(Ti,k|q,Ti,<k) is the likelihood ratio, and ˆA3D
i,k is our 3D-SPO advantage on i-th
trajectory and k-th token, πold is the behavior policy used to generate rollouts, πref is the frozen
reference policy, and DKL is the KL divergence term to prevent over-exploration.
This formulation offers three key advantages: (1) It integrates object-level physics-aware modulation
in advantage estimate, allowing the model to focus learning on coordinate-relevant tokens and
better internalize spatial constraints; (2) It encourages the generation of high-quality layouts in early
refinement steps through discounted reward accumulation, providing trajectory-level supervision
without requiring ground-truth annotations; and (3) It supports stable, group-wise policy updates that
improve generalization to diverse and complex scene configurations.
3
EXPERIMENTS
Here, we evaluate MetaSpatial’s effectiveness in improving spatial reasoning and 3D layout generation
capabilities of VLMs through reinforcement learning. We present experimental setups, quantitative
metrics, qualitative comparisons, and ablation analyses to demonstrate the benefits of MetaSpatial.
In addition, to demonstrate the zero-shot generalization improvements, we evaluate models on the
Open3DVQA (Zhan et al., 2025) benchmark as shown in Appendix F.
3.1
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
We conduct experiments using Qwen2.5-VL 3B and 7B as our base VLMs. All models are trained on
a curated dataset of indoor 3D scenes, where each scene includes a room image, a list of objects with
specifications, and a user preference as shown in Appendix C. Notably, our dataset does not contain
ground-truth object coordinates; it only provides textual room descriptions and a corresponding asset
library. Instead of relying on ground-truth layouts, MetaSpatial is trained purely through interaction
and feedback using our custom reward function. We also include other scene layout generation
methods: I-Design (Çelen et al., 2024), LayoutGPT (Feng et al., 2023). For rendering, we use Blender
6


Table 1: Performance comparison across models with and without RL. RL leads to consistent
improvements in formatting accuracy, physical feasibility, and perceptual scene quality.
Model
Format ↑
GPT-4o Score ↑
Collision ↓
Constraint ↓
Overall
Qwen 3B
0.12
0.03
79.0%
100%
-0.27
Qwen 3B + MetaSpatial
0.49
0.18
68.5%
100%
-0.09
Qwen 7B
0.85
0.35
38.2%
95.5%
0.51
Qwen 7B + MetaSpatial
0.98
0.62
11.5%
70.8%
0.95
GPT-4o
0.95
0.58
26.3%
79.4%
0.87
I-Design
-
0.64
22.5%
83.3%
0.92
LayoutGPT
-
0.55
20.7%
80.2%
0.85
and deploy it in a dedicated server. For each generated layout, the system places 3D assets using the
predicted (x, y, z) coordinates through scripted Python. Since the room geometry and asset set are
predefined (but unlabeled), this enables fully automated rendering without annotations. The renderer
produces high-resolution images from a fixed, human-readable angle for visual evaluation, including
GPT-4o-based perceptual scoring.
Our total reward is computed as a weighted combination of four components, directly reflecting the
priorities in our learning objective:
R(Lt) = 1
50Rrender + 0.5 · Rformat −0.2 · CollisionRatio −0.2 · ConstraintVioRatio,
(4)
where Rrender is the aggregated GPT-4o score, obtained by evaluating rendered scene images across
five criteria (Realism, Functionality, Layout, Color Scheme, and Aesthetic), each scored from 1 to 10
and normalized by 50; Rformat is a structured format reward with values in {0, 0.1, 0.5, 1.0}, based
on whether the model output is correctly structured, parsable, and matches the expected number
of objects; CollisionRatio is the percentage of objects that overlap with others in the 3D layout,
penalizing physically implausible scenes; ConstraintVioRatio is the proportion of objects violating
spatial constraints, such as exceeding room boundaries or being improperly placed.
This reward composition guides RL by promoting physically valid and aesthetically pleasing layouts
while penalizing malformed or unrealistic ones. We apply multi-turn refinement and 3D-SPO to
update the model with trajectory-aware gradients during training. In comparison, we only use
single-turn inference to compare the final results without multi-turn refinements.
3.2
QUANTITATIVE RESULTS
We report results across three metrics: (1) format correctness (i.e., structurally valid JSON outputs),
(2) physical feasibility (collision and constraint violation ratios), and (3) GPT-4o-assessed layout
quality. Table 1 presents the performance of Qwen-VL models (3B and 7B) with and without
MetaSpatial. We observe that MetaSpatial significantly improves all metrics. For format correctness,
MetaSpatial enables models to better conform to structured output expectations, with accuracy rising
from 0.12 to 0.49 in the 3B model and from 0.85 to 0.98 in the 7B model. In terms of physical
feasibility, RL training reduces the collision rate by 10.5% for the 3B model and 26.7% for the 7B
model, while also lowering the constraint violation ratio, especially in the 7B setting. Importantly,
the GPT-4o-based perceptual scores—used as a proxy for overall layout realism, coherence, and
alignment with user preference—show notable gains: from 0.03 to 0.18 for Qwen-VL 3B, and from
0.35 to 0.62 for Qwen-VL 7B. These improvements are reflected in the final composite scores as
well, where Qwen-VL 7B with RL achieves 0.95 compared to 0.51 without RL. Overall, the results
demonstrate that MetaSpatial enhances the spatial reasoning and generation quality of VLMs, and
that larger models benefit more from multi-turn refinement and structured reward feedback.
Furthermore, we compare MetaSpatial-trained Qwen-VL 7B against strong baselines, including
GPT-4o, LayoutGPT, and I-Design. Results show that Qwen-VL 7B, after MetaSpatial training,
outperforms these closed or multi-round systems in most metrics, particularly in physical feasibility.
Specifically, our model achieves lower collision and constraint violation rates, demonstrating its
superior ability to internalize spatial rules and generate physically plausible layouts.
7


Table 2: Ablation study of reward components on Qwen2.5-VL 7B.
Reward Setting
Format ↑
GPT-4o Score ↑
Collision ↓
Constraint ↓
Full Reward (Ours)
0.98
0.62
11.5%
70.8%
w/o Rendering (λ3 = 0)
0.96
0.45
14.5%
80.5%
w/o Physics (λ2 = 0)
0.97
0.40
35.0%
89.6%
w/o Format (λ1 = 0)
0.72
0.41
16.3%
84.8%
Table 3: Comparison of single-step RL and our multi-turn refinement strategy with 3D-SPO
Method
Format ↑
GPT-4o Score ↑
Collision ↓
Constraint ↓
One-step RL (PPO)
0.97
0.44
26.6%
83.0%
Multi-turn RL (GRPO) w/ T = 1
0.96
0.5
21.3%
81.2%
Multi-turn RL (3D-SPO) w/ T = 1
0.97
0.53
20.3%
77.0%
Multi-turn RL (GRPO) w/ T = 3
0.96
0.54
16.0%
79.5%
Multi-turn RL (3D-SPO) w/ T = 3
0.97
0.60
14.7%
74.3%
Multi-turn RL (GRPO) w/ T = 5
0.98
0.58
13.7%
76.2%
Multi-turn RL (3D-SPO) w/ T = 5
0.98
0.62
11.5%
70.8%
Multi-turn RL (GRPO) w/ T = 7
0.99
0.55
15.3%
78.5%
Multi-turn RL (3D-SPO) w/ T = 7
0.99
0.59
13.9%
75.2%
3.3
QUALITATIVE RESULTS
Figure 4 illustrates qualitative comparisons between scenes generated before and after RL training.
Prior to reinforcement learning, object placements are often misaligned, physically implausible, and
visually cluttered, with issues such as floating or overlapping items. After applying MetaSpatial,
layouts become significantly more structured and realistic—objects are better aligned, grounded, and
arranged in contextually appropriate positions. These improvements confirm that RL enables VLMs
to internalize spatial constraints and generate more coherent, functional 3D scenes, demonstrating its
value for real-world applications like AR/VR, metaverse design, and game development.
3.4
ABLATION STUDY
We further analyze the contribution of each reward component by training models with partial reward
configurations. Table 2 shows that removing any reward component leads to degraded performance,
especially when the rendering-based reward is omitted. Table 6 demonstrates that exposing the
model’s step-wise spatial rationale provides a stronger learning signal for RL. These results verify
that all components contribute to robust and reliable spatial reasoning.
For performance, we compare the training-only multi-turn refinement strategy with a one-step
RL baseline (Proximal Policy Optimization, PPO), as well as GRPO and 3D-SPO variants using
different refinement depths. As shown in Table 3, multi-turn refinement improves layout quality
across all evaluation metrics compared to single-step optimization. 3D-SPO method achieves the
best overall performance, significantly reducing collision and constraint violation rates. Notably,
3D-SPO outperforms GRPO under the same number of refinement steps, particularly in physical
plausibility metrics. For example, with T = 5 refinement steps, 3D-SPO achieves a collision rate
of 11.5% and a constraint violation rate of 70.8%, both lower than the GRPO counterpart. These
improvements highlight the benefit of incorporating object-level physics-aware modulation during
advantage estimation. We also observe that increasing the number of refinement steps generally
boosts performance; however, this trend does not hold indefinitely. When T = 7, performance
slightly degrades compared to T = 5, suggesting that excessive refinement may lead to over-
adjustments or reward saturation. This finding highlights the importance of balancing refinement
depth with policy stability during training. For training Efficiency, while multi-turn refinement
adds computation during rollout, its primary benefit is accelerating training. In early single-turn
experiments, convergence was much slower—even without rendering—while format and constraint
scores improved only gradually. Multi-turn refinement, by contrast, generates multiple layouts per
prompt, yielding richer supervision and enabling discounted cumulative rewards that encourage high-
quality layouts from the first step, reducing reliance on multi-step inference at test time. Moreover,
for large models (e.g., 7B), training time is dominated by parameter updates and checkpointing
rather than rollout, so multi-turn refinement increases learning signal without proportional update
cost. Empirically, achieving similar performance with single-turn training required about 2× more
8


Figure 4: Before vs After: It highlights the efficacy of MetaSpatial in improving 3D spatial reasoning.
optimization steps and 2.5× longer wall-clock time than our multi-turn setup. For reasoning trace
influence, including a reasoning trace yields consistent gains: GPT-4o perceptual score rises from
0.41 to 0.52, collision rate drops by 6.8 pp (34.2% →27.4%), and constraint violations fall by 6.6 pp
(87.9% →81.3%). Format accuracy also improves slightly (0.85 →0.87) as shown in Table 6. These
results indicate that exposing the model’s step-wise spatial rationale provides a stronger learning
signal for RL, improving both semantic layout quality and physical plausibility. We also provide a
reasoning example of trained model in Example 2.
3.5
SUPERVISED FINE-TUNING WITH HIGH-REWARD LAYOUTS
To further explore whether the highest-reward rollouts can serve as pseudo-annotations for SFT, we
constructed an SFT dataset from layouts whose composite reward exceeded a threshold (0.8). We
conducted three sets of experiments:
SFT from High-Reward Layouts. Using Qwen-7B as the base model, we collected 218 pseudo-
SFT samples within 100 RL steps and trained a model solely on this data. As shown in Table 7,
SFT notably improved format accuracy (0.96 vs. 0.87) but underperformed RL in terms of spatial
reasoning and physical feasibility (e.g., GPT-4o score dropped from 0.52 to 0.42, and collision rate
increased slightly from 27.4% to 30.5%).
Cold-Start SFT + RL Fine-Tuning. We then adopted the SFT-trained model as a warm-start and
continued training with RL for 100 steps. This hybrid strategy yielded strong results: format accuracy
reached 0.98, GPT-4o score improved to 0.60, and collision rate decreased to 13.4%. Remarkably,
these results nearly match our full RL pipeline but required only half the number of RL steps,
demonstrating that SFT provides a highly efficient initialization.
Extension to Smaller Models. Finally, we tested the cold-start strategy on a weaker 3B model that
initially struggled with format accuracy. After SFT-based warm-start and 100 RL steps, the model
achieved 0.88 format accuracy and surpassed our reported baseline in all metrics (GPT-4o score:
0.34; collision: 33.6%; constraint satisfaction: 81.5%).
Summary. These experiments show that high-reward rollouts can be leveraged as pseudo-labeled
SFT data to enhance format fidelity and accelerate RL convergence. While pure SFT improves
structural correctness, the combination of SFT cold-start and RL fine-tuning provides both efficiency
and robustness, particularly benefiting smaller models.
4
CONCLUSION, LIMITATION, AND FUTURE WORK
We introduce MetaSpatial, the first reinforcement-learning framework that equips vision–language
models with robust 3D spatial reasoning. MetaSpatial combines a three-level reward scheme (format
validity, physics consistency, and rendering quality) with a multi-turn refinement pipeline optimized
by an enhanced 3D-SPO algorithm. This design lets a VLM produce physically plausible, structurally
coherent, and aesthetically pleasing 3D layouts—without post-processing or large annotated datasets.
Experiments confirm substantial gains in layout quality and adaptability over standard supervised
baselines. Looking ahead, we will develop lighter rendering and evaluation pipelines to cut computa-
tional cost, extend MetaSpatial to open-world object retrieval and multi-room scenes, and explore its
transferability to domains such as robotic planning, AR/VR scene design, and embodied AI.
9


5
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We gratefully acknowledge support from the NVIDIA Academic Grant (“Interactive Spatial Rea-
soning and 3D Scene Generation with RL-Enhanced VLMs”) and the provision of cloud computing
resources, which enabled systematic RL training and evaluation of VLMs. This paper is a core
component of that project. The views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
those of NVIDIA.
10


REFERENCES
Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, Antoine Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Hasson, Karel
Lenc, Arthur Mensch, Katherine Millican, Malcolm Reynolds, et al. Flamingo: a visual language
model for few-shot learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:23716–23736,
2022.
Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain,
Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. Training a helpful and harmless assistant with
reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862, 2022.
Ata Çelen, Guo Han, Konrad Schindler, Luc Van Gool, Iro Armeni, Anton Obukhov, and Xi Wang.
I-design: Personalized llm interior designer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.02838, 2024.
Boyuan Chen, Zhuo Xu, Sean Kirmani, Brain Ichter, Dorsa Sadigh, Leonidas Guibas, and Fei Xia.
Spatialvlm: Endowing vision-language models with spatial reasoning capabilities. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 14455–14465,
2024.
Chuan Fang, Yuan Dong, Kunming Luo, Xiaotao Hu, Rakesh Shrestha, and Ping Tan.
Ctrl-
room: controllable text-to-3d room meshes generation with layout constraints. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.03602, 2023.
Weixi Feng, Wanrong Zhu, Tsu-jui Fu, Varun Jampani, Arjun Akula, Xuehai He, Sugato Basu,
Xin Eric Wang, and William Yang Wang. Layoutgpt: Compositional visual planning and generation
with large language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:18225–18250,
2023.
Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin Xu, Qihao Zhu,
Shirong Ma, Peiyi Wang, Xiao Bi, et al. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms
via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948, 2025.
Aaron Jaech, Adam Kalai, Adam Lerer, Adam Richardson, Ahmed El-Kishky, Aiden Low, Alec
Helyar, Aleksander Madry, Alex Beutel, Alex Carney, et al. Openai o1 system card. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2412.16720, 2024.
Yangzhe Kong, Daeun Song, Jing Liang, Dinesh Manocha, Ziyu Yao, and Xuesu Xiao. Autospatial:
Visual-language reasoning for social robot navigation through efficient spatial reasoning learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.07557, 2025.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Hoi. Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-image
pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models. In International conference
on machine learning, pp. 19730–19742. PMLR, 2023.
Jiawei Liu and Lingming Zhang. Code-r1: Reproducing r1 for code with reliable rewards. github,
2025.
Minghua Liu, Ruoxi Shi, Kaiming Kuang, Yinhao Zhu, Xuanlin Li, Shizhong Han, Hong Cai,
Fatih Porikli, and Hao Su. Openshape: Scaling up 3d shape representation towards open-world
understanding. Advances in neural information processing systems, 36:44860–44879, 2023.
Yunze Man, Shuhong Zheng, Zhipeng Bao, Martial Hebert, Liangyan Gui, and Yu-Xiong Wang.
Lexicon3d: Probing visual foundation models for complex 3d scene understanding. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:76819–76847, 2024.
Gianluca Mondillo, Simone Colosimo, Alessandra Perrotta, Vittoria Frattolillo, and Mariapia Masino.
Comparative evaluation of advanced ai reasoning models in pediatric clinical decision support:
Chatgpt o1 vs. deepseek-r1. medRxiv, pp. 2025–01, 2025.
Jiayi Pan, Junjie Zhang, Xingyao Wang, Lifan Yuan, Hao Peng, and Alane Suhr.
Tinyzero.
https://github.com/Jiayi-Pan/TinyZero, 2025a. Accessed: 2025-01-24.
Zhenyu Pan, Rongyu Cao, Yongchang Cao, Yingwei Ma, Binhua Li, Fei Huang, Han Liu, and
Yongbin Li. Codev-bench: How do llms understand developer-centric code completion? arXiv
preprint arXiv:2410.01353, 2024a.
11


Zhenyu Pan, Haozheng Luo, Manling Li, and Han Liu. Chain-of-action: Faithful and multimodal
question answering through large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.17359, 2024b.
Zhenyu Pan, Haozheng Luo, Manling Li, and Han Liu. Conv-coa: Improving open-domain ques-
tion answering in large language models via conversational chain-of-action.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2405.17822, 2024c.
Zhenyu Pan, Xuefeng Song, Yunkun Wang, Rongyu Cao, Binhua Li, Yongbin Li, and Han Liu. Do
code llms understand design patterns? arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.04835, 2025b.
Ohad Rahamim, Hilit Segev, Idan Achituve, Yuval Atzmon, Yoni Kasten, and Gal Chechik.
Lay-a-scene: Personalized 3d object arrangement using text-to-image priors. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.00687, 2024.
Jonas Schult, Sam Tsai, Lukas Höllein, Bichen Wu, Jialiang Wang, Chih-Yao Ma, Kunpeng Li,
Xiaofang Wang, Felix Wimbauer, Zijian He, et al. Controlroom3d: Room generation using
semantic proxy rooms. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pp. 6201–6210, 2024.
Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang,
Mingchuan Zhang, YK Li, Y Wu, et al. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathematical
reasoning in open language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300, 2024.
Fan-Yun Sun, Weiyu Liu, Siyi Gu, Dylan Lim, Goutam Bhat, Federico Tombari, Manling Li, Nick
Haber, and Jiajun Wu. Layoutvlm: Differentiable optimization of 3d layout via vision-language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.02193, 2024.
Wei-Feng Tung and Soe-Tysr Yuan. idesign: an intelligent design framework for service innovation.
In 2007 40th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS’07), pp. 64–64.
IEEE, 2007.
Zihan Wang, Kangrui Wang, Qineng Wang, Pingyue Zhang, Linjie Li, Zhengyuan Yang, Kefan Yu,
Minh Nhat Nguyen, Licheng Liu, Eli Gottlieb, et al. Ragen: Understanding self-evolution in llm
agents via multi-turn reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.20073, 2025.
Tianyu Wu, Shizhu He, Jingping Liu, Siqi Sun, Kang Liu, Qing-Long Han, and Yang Tang. A brief
overview of chatgpt: The history, status quo and potential future development. IEEE/CAA Journal
of Automatica Sinica, 10(5):1122–1136, 2023.
Weichen Zhan, Zile Zhou, Zhiheng Zheng, Chen Gao, Jinqiang Cui, Yong Li, Xinlei Chen, and
Xiao-Ping Zhang. Open3dvqa: A benchmark for comprehensive spatial reasoning with multimodal
large language model in open space. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.11094, 2025.
Jianshu Zhang, Dongyu Yao, Renjie Pi, Paul Pu Liang, and Yi R. Fung. Vlm2-bench: A closer look
at how well vlms implicitly link explicit matching visual cues, 2025. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2502.12084.
Jingyi Zhang, Jiaxing Huang, Sheng Jin, and Shijian Lu. Vision-language models for vision tasks: A
survey. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2024.
Yang Zhou, Zongjin He, Qixuan Li, and Chao Wang. Layoutdreamer: Physics-guided layout for
text-to-3d compositional scene generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.01949, 2025.
12


Appendix
A Broader impacts
13
B
Related Work
13
B.1
3D Scene Generation Paradigms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
B.2
Spatial Reasoning with VLMs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
B.3
RL for Enhancing Reasoning in Foundation Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
C Dataset
15
C.1
Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
C.2
Stage 1: Room–Prompt Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
C.3
Stage 2: Object-List Synthesis via I-DESIGN
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
C.4
Stage 3: Asset Retrieval from Objaverse . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
C.5
Stage 4: Layout Synthesis and Rendering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
C.6
Limitations and Future Extensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
C.7
Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
C.8
Prompt Example: Full Scene Layout Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
D Reasoning Example
17
E
Reward
18
E.1
Rendering-based Reward Prompt Template
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
F
General Spatial Reasoning Benchmarks
19
G Additional Results
20
A
BROADER IMPACTS
This work has both potential positive and negative societal impacts. On the positive side, MetaSpatial
enables more realistic and physically coherent 3D scene layouts, which can benefit applications in
AR/VR design, robotics, education, and interior planning (Zhang et al., 2025). The framework could
make spatial reasoning more accessible and scalable, lowering the barrier for creators, architects,
and simulation developers to design virtual environments or train agents in physically grounded
simulations. However, the same technology may also introduce risks if misused. High-fidelity 3D
layouts could be applied in disinformation contexts, such as producing synthetic environments for
propaganda or manipulation in virtual spaces. Additionally, if such models are trained on biased or
unrepresentative data, they may reinforce cultural stereotypes in the generated layouts (e.g., object
placement norms across cultures or socioeconomic classes). To mitigate these risks, we advocate for
(i) careful data auditing, (ii) controlled release of powerful models, and (iii) monitoring downstream
use cases, especially in immersive or generative platforms. While our work is foundational and
focuses on structured layout prediction rather than full content synthesis, we recognize its downstream
impact potential and encourage responsible deployment.
B
RELATED WORK
Our work builds upon recent progress in 3D scene generation, vision-language modeling, and
reinforcement learning for structured reasoning. We review three lines of related research: (1)
paradigms for generating 3D scenes either through generative modeling or layout-based synthesis;
(2) methods for enhancing spatial reasoning of VLMs; and (3) the emerging role of RL in enhancing
the reasoning capabilities of foundation models. These perspectives contextualize the motivation and
novelty of our proposed MetaSpatial framework together.
13


B.1
3D SCENE GENERATION PARADIGMS
In recent years, two primary directions have emerged in 3D scene generation. The first direction
leverages generative models to create 3D representations such as meshes (Schult et al., 2024; Man
et al., 2024). However, the generated scenes often lack the granularity and fidelity required for
downstream embodied applications, where high-quality and individually controllable objects are
essential (Fang et al., 2023). With the advancement of large foundation models (Pan et al., 2024b;c;
2025b; 2024a), the second direction focuses on generating intermediate representations-namely,
scene layouts-by retrieving objects from large-scale asset repositories (Çelen et al., 2024; Rahamim
et al., 2024). LayoutGPT is among the first to utilize LLMs as visual planners, generating layouts
conditioned on text descriptions (Feng et al., 2023). However, its performance is limited by the
general-purpose pretraining strategy of LLMs. I-Design further introduces a multi-agent framework,
where a team of LLMs represents different roles in the design process (Çelen et al., 2024). To enhance
physical plausibility, LayoutDreamer integrates 3D Gaussian Splatting to optimize the generated
layout (Zhou et al., 2025). Meanwhile, LayoutVLM leverages the visual understanding capabilities of
VLMs to produce enhanced representations from visually marked images, followed by a differentiable
optimization process (Sun et al., 2024). This work also demonstrates that fine-tuning VLMs with
existing layout data can improve generation quality. Despite these advances, two key challenges
remain: (1) the lack of internalized 3D spatial reasoning in VLMs, which limits their abilities to
ensure physical plausibility without costly post-processing; and (2) the inefficient of SFT, which
limits generation diversity due to the absence of perfect ground truth annotations. These challenges
motivate us to explore a new paradigm for layout generation.
B.2
SPATIAL REASONING WITH VLMS
VLMs show impressive capabilities in tasks involving visual understanding and natural language
generation, such as image captioning, visual question answering, and referring expression comprehen-
sion (Zhang et al., 2024). However, their capacity for structured spatial reasoning—particularly in 3D
environments—remains underexplored. Prior works such as BLIP-2 (Li et al., 2023) and Flamingo
(Alayrac et al., 2022) exhibit limited understanding of spatial relations beyond 2D grounding or
image-text alignment. Recent efforts attempt to address this by providing VLMs with more struc-
tured or spatially annotated inputs such as SpatialVLM (Chen et al., 2024) and AutoSpatial (Kong
et al., 2025). Yet, such approaches still depend heavily on external supervision to enforce spatial
constraints. However, 3D spatial reasoning inherently lacks perfect annotations and a single ground
truth—multiple valid layouts can exist for the same input, each satisfying different contextual or
functional constraints. As a result, current supervised approaches struggle to capture the diversity and
adaptability required for realistic scene generation. In contrast, MetaSpatial addresses this limitation
by allowing VLMs to learn spatial reasoning through interactive feedback and constraint-driven
exploration, moving beyond annotation-dependent paradigms.
B.3
RL FOR ENHANCING REASONING IN FOUNDATION MODELS
RL recently re-emerges as a promising strategy for improving the reasoning capabilities of large
foundation models (Guo et al., 2025). Instead of relying on traditional SFT with fixed ground truth,
RL allows models to learn from evaluative feedback, which is especially useful in tasks lacking
a single correct answer or exhibiting structural ambiguity (Mondillo et al., 2025). In language
models, RL has been widely used in the form of Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback
(RLHF) to align model outputs with human preferences (Bai et al., 2022). Such approaches are
fundamental to the success of instruction-following models such as ChatGPT (Wu et al., 2023).
In addition, rule-based reinforcement fine-tuning—such as OpenAI’s o1 (Jaech et al., 2024) and
DeepSeek-R1 (Guo et al., 2025)—has demonstrated strong performance in mathematical reasoning
(Pan et al., 2025a), code generation (Liu & Zhang, 2025), and multi-step logic tasks (Wang et al.,
2025). These methods show that verifiable rewards—such as symbolic correctness or execution-based
signals—can serve as effective supervision substitutes. While RL shows strong potential in language
tasks, it remains largely unexplored in multimodal or spatial contexts. Unlike these domains, 3D
layout generation lacks a definitive ground truth—multiple valid solutions may exist for the same
input—making supervised fine-tuning insufficient to cover the full solution space. To address this,
we propose the first rule-driven RL framework for vision-language models in 3D environments,
incorporating multi-turn refinement and optimization to enable adaptive, constraint-aware spatial
reasoning without reliance on rigid annotations.
14


C
DATASET
C.1
OVERVIEW
Our dataset is built on top of I-DESIGN (Çelen et al., 2024) and consists of 10,000 synthetic indoor
scenes. We have four-stage construction pipeline: (i) prompt generation, (ii) object-list synthesis via
I-DESIGN, (iii) asset retrieval from Objaverse, and (iv) layout synthesis & rendering.
C.2
STAGE 1: ROOM–PROMPT GENERATION
• Language model. We employ GPT-4o with a system prompt “You are an interior designer
...”.
• Scale. 10 000 unique prompts.
• Attributes.
Each prompt specifies room type, interior style, and room dimensions
(L, W, H) ∈[3 m, 10 m]2 × [2.6 m, 4 m].
C.3
STAGE 2: OBJECT-LIST SYNTHESIS VIA I-DESIGN
• Input: textual prompt from Stage 1.
• Output: an inventory of 10–20 objects, each with {category, coarse size, material}.
• Post-processing: synonym normalisation and duplicate removal.
C.4
STAGE 3: ASSET RETRIEVAL FROM OBJAVERSE
• Retriever. OpenShape (Liu et al., 2023)
• Selection rule. Top-1 similarity, vertex count< 100 k, licence ∈CC0, CC-BY.
C.5
STAGE 4: LAYOUT SYNTHESIS AND RENDERING
• Coarse placement via I-DESIGN physics module; grid resolution 0.1 m.
• Fine collision pass using Bullet (50 steps).
• Blender 4.2 - Cycles, 500 × 500 px, 35 mm camera.
Each scene yields scene_X.jpg, layout_X.json, and a folder of GLB assets.
C.6
LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE EXTENSIONS
Current scenes contain a single room and static lighting. We plan to extend the dataset to multi-room
environments with connectivity graphs, diversified lighting, and a larger long-tail object distribution.
C.7
EXAMPLES
Figure 9 illustrates several sample scenes from our dataset and model outputs. For each case, we
show the input user prompt, the rendered scene layout, and optionally a visualization of the predicted
object placements.
C.8
PROMPT EXAMPLE: FULL SCENE LAYOUT GENERATION
The following is a full example of the prompt template we use to guide GPT-4o in predicting object
layouts, including room description, constraints, and the JSON-encoded input. The output is expected
to consist of spatial reasoning in a <think> block and object positions in a <answer> block.
15


Figure 5: Prompt: "A bustling kitchen with pots
clattering and the aroma of spices filling the air, chefs
moving quickly in a culinary dance."
Figure 6: Prompt: "A quaint country kitchen with a
farmhouse sink, checkered curtains, and a pie cooling
on the windowsill."
Figure 7: Prompt: "A small but charming tea room
with a round table set with delicate china, the scent of
jasmine tea lingers in the air."
Figure 8: Prompt: "A cozy living room with a large
sectional, a coffee table stacked with books, and a
plush rug underfoot."
Figure 9: Qualitative examples showing prompts, rendered layouts, and predicted object placements.
16


Listing 1: Full Prompt Template Example for Layout Generation
## Task Description
You are an intelligent assistant for arranging objects in a room based
,→on JSON data. The given image is the shape of the room. Your task
,→is to:
1. Compute spatial coordinates for each object, respecting room layout
,→and constraints.
2. Ensure logical placement by preventing object collisions and
,→respecting spatial boundaries.
3. Respect user preferences when arranging objects.
## Room Information
- Room Dimensions: {'x': 6, 'y': 5, 'z': 3} (Length meter * Width meter
,→* Height meter).
- Room Layout Elements (reference points for object placement):
['south_wall', 'north_wall', 'west_wall', 'east_wall', 'middle of the
,→room', 'ceiling'].
## User Preferences
A bustling kitchen with pots clattering and the aroma of spices filling
,→the air, chefs moving quickly in a culinary dance.
## Placement Rules:
1. Compute the Spatial Coordinates of Each Object and Generate a
,→"positions" (x, y, z) field for each object.
2. Ensure Objects Do Not Collide
3. Maintain Logical Consistency
## Output Format
First reason about the placement logic and provide a step-by-step
,→explanation within the <think> </think> tags. After the reasoning
,→process, the final output must be structured in JSON format within
,→<answer> </answer> tags. Only output the generated position of the
,→objects. Do not output the original object information like style,
,→material, size_in_meters, etc.
## Expected Output
<think>
Reasoning process here...
</think>
<answer>
{"new_object_id": "sectional_sofa_1","x": 1.0,"y": 1.82,"z": 0.45}
</answer>
## Input JSON Data:
[ ... full JSON omitted for brevity, see supplementary data ... ]
D
REASONING EXAMPLE
Listing 2: A reasoning trace example of the trained model
The task requires arranging objects in a room based on given placement
,→rules, ensuring spatial consistency and preventing object
,→collisions. Given the input JSON data and the room dimensions and
,→layout elements, I will compute the spatial coordinates for each
,→object while respecting these constraints. The electric fireplace
,→is placed on the south wall, but no fireplace is defined in the
,→input JSON. However, I can generate a sensible position using the
,→provided room dimensions and layout elements. The wall art should
,→be placed on the west and east walls, and the bookshelf should be
,→adjacent to the fireplace. Let's place the bookshelf on the west
17


,→wall, using the x position determined by its size and constraints,
,→and the
fireplace on the south wall. The wall art will be placed on the west and
,→east walls, outside of the room dimensions to avoid collisions.
[...]
E
REWARD
E.1
RENDERING-BASED REWARD PROMPT TEMPLATE
We use the following prompt to elicit scene-level perceptual scores from GPT-4o. The model is asked
to assign a grade between 1 and 10 (or "unknown") across five human-aligned criteria. The prompt
includes a user-defined preference and requests a structured JSON response.
18


Listing 3: Full Prompt Template Example for Layout Generation
Give a grade from 1 to 10 or unknown to the following room renders based
,→on how well they correspond together to the user preference (in
,→triple backquotes) in the following aspects:
- Realism and 3D Geometric Consistency
- Functionality and Activity-based Alignment
- Layout and furniture
- Color Scheme and Material Choices
- Overall Aesthetic and Atmosphere
User Preference:
```{user_preference}```
Return the results in the following JSON format:
```json
{example_json}
F
GENERAL SPATIAL REASONING BENCHMARKS
We evaluate spatial reasoning capabilities using Open3DVQA (Zhan et al., 2025), a new benchmark
with 9,000 VQA samples collected from a realistic 3D urban simulator. The dataset covers various
spatial reasoning types, including relative and absolute positions, object attributes, and different
viewpoints (egocentric vs. allocentric). In qualitative tasks, MetaSpatial-7B achieves the best overall
accuracy (73.5%), outperforming GPT-4, GPT-4o, and both versions of Qwen-VL. Fine-tuned models
like Qwen-VL-7B-SFT also show strong gains over their base versions, highlighting the benefit of
targeted training. In quantitative tasks, MetaSpatial leads with the highest success rates and lowest
errors, especially on challenging dimensions like vertical distance, volume, and height estimation.
Compared to GPT-4 and GPT-4o, MetaSpatial shows better precision in spatial measurements.
Overall, Open3DVQA reveals that (1) models reason better about relative than absolute positions and
(2) RL improves performance more than SFT in 3D spatial reasoning tasks.
Qualitative
Spatial Qualitative Relationship
Spatial Object Attribute
Overall
Left/Right
Below/Above
Behind/Front
Tall/Short
Wide/Thin
Big/Small
Avg.
GPT-4
51.5
50.0
46.0
59.3
53.9
60.9
51.1
GPT-4o
58.5
49.2
53.9
58.5
54.6
68.7
58.7
LLaVA-7B
49.2
42.9
49.2
21.0
31.2
39.8
39.3
Qwen-VL-7B
50.0
48.4
42.9
52.3
40.6
42.1
46.9
Qwen-VL-7B-SFT
73.4
67.1
66.4
75.7
64.0
71.8
72.8
MetaSpatial-7B
76.9
72.8
70.3
78.5
68.2
74.7
73.5
Table 4: Model Performance on qualitative spatial reasoning tasks. Success rates (↑) to evaluate
qualitative questions.
Quantitative
Spatial Quantitative relationship
Spatial Object Attribute
Overall
Direct Distance
Horizontal Distance
Vertical Distance
Direction
Height
Width
Volume
Avg.
GPT-4
9.3 / 2.76
9.3 / 2.76
3.1 / >10
9.3 / 99.3◦
21.8 / 2.50
12.5 / 1.42
9.3 / >10
11.0
GPT-4o
12.5 / 0.64
15.6 / 1.83
3.1 / 11.28
34.3 / 66.5◦
15.6 / 0.53
9.3 / 0.59
3.1 / 0.89
15.3
LLaVA-7B
0.0 / 0.99
0.0 / 1.17
0.0 / 1.03
6.2 / 60.0◦
3.1 / 0.81
6.2 / 11.11
6.2 / 1.48
3.6
QwenVL-7B
3.1 / 1.69
3.1 / 2.83
3.1 / 20.87
18.7 / 92.8◦
3.1 / 1.67
6.2 / 0.87
0.0 / 0.94
5.1
Qwen-VL-7B-SFT
37.5 / 0.60
15.6 / 0.93
31.2 / 2.11
31.2 / 76.4◦
59.3 / 0.38
21.8 / 1.79
18.7 / >10
34.1
MetaSpatial-7B
39.2 / 0.56
16.5 / 0.80
33.7 / 0.88
34.6 / 75.0◦
61.4 / 0.33
23.7 / 0.55
20.9 / 0.92
35.6
Table 5: Model Performance on quantitative spatial reasoning task. We use success rates (↑) and
absolute relative error (↓) to evaluate the quantitative questions.
19


G
ADDITIONAL RESULTS
Table 6: Effect of reasoning traces during RL. Adding a natural-language reasoning trace improves
perceptual quality and physical plausibility, with slight gains in formatting.
Metric
RL (w/ Reasoning Trace)
RL (w/o Trace)
Format Accuracy ↑
0.87
0.85
GPT-4o Score ↑
0.52
0.41
Collision Rate ↓
27.4%
34.2%
Constraint Violations ↓
81.3%
87.9%
Table 7: Comparison of RL, SFT from high-reward layouts, and hybrid strategies. Format = format
accuracy; GPT-4o = GPT-4o evaluation score; ↓= lower is better; ↑= higher is better.
Model / Strategy
Format
GPT-4o
Collision ↓
Constraint ↑
Qwen-7B (RL)
0.87
0.52
27.4%
81.3%
Qwen-7B (SFT)
0.96
0.42
30.5%
86.9%
Qwen-7B (SFT + RL)
0.98
0.60
13.4%
74.5%
Qwen-3B (SFT + RL)
0.88
0.34
33.6%
81.5%
20
