A Review of Prominent Paradigms for LLM-Based Agents: Tool Use
(Including RAG), Planning, and Feedback Learning
Xinzhe Li *
Independent Researcher
sergioli212@outlook.com
Abstract
Tool use, planning, and feedback learning are
currently three prominent paradigms for de-
veloping Large Language Model (LLM)-based
agents across various tasks. Although numer-
ous frameworks have been devised for each
paradigm, their intricate workflows and incon-
sistent taxonomy create challenges in under-
standing and reviewing the frameworks across
different paradigms. This survey introduces
a unified taxonomy to systematically review
and discuss these frameworks. Specifically,
1) the taxonomy defines environments/tasks,
common LLM-profiled roles or LMPRs (pol-
icy models, evaluators, and dynamic models),
and universally applicable workflows found
in prior work, and 2) it enables a comparison
of key perspectives on the implementations of
LMPRs and workflow designs across different
agent paradigms and frameworks. 3) Finally,
we identify three limitations in existing work-
flow designs and systematically discuss the fu-
ture work. Resources have been made publicly
available at in our GitHub repository https://
github.com/xinzhel/LLM-Agent-Survey.
1
Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have acquired
extensive general knowledge and human-like rea-
soning capabilities (Santurkar et al., 2023; Wang
et al., 2022; Zhong et al., 2022, 2023), positioning
them as pivotal in constructing AI agents known as
LLM-based agents. In the context of this survey,
LLM-based agents are defined by their ability to
interact actively with external tools (tool use) or
environments (Yao et al., 2023b) and are designed
to function as integral components of agency for
planning (Yao et al., 2023a) and feedback learn-
ing (Shinn et al., 2023).
*Part of work conducted while affiliated with Deakin Uni-
versity.
Comparisons with Existing Surveys
Current
surveys lack a coherent and unified starting point
for discussing the three paradigms due to two main
limitations: 1) Focusing on a specific paradigm
or domain: For example, Huang et al. (2024) ex-
plore frameworks in the planning paradigm. Hu
et al. (2024); Gallotta et al. (2024) examine LLM-
based agents in the context of games. In contrast,
these paradigms represent general principles and
mental models that govern the development and
behavior of these agents. Hence, their frameworks
should be discussed in a task-agnostic way. To
achieve this, we extract universal workflows. Un-
less otherwise specified, in this survey, the term
“framework” refers to a complete workflow for spe-
cific low-level tasks, while “workflow” refers to
the task-agnostic process derived from one or more
frameworks. 2) Lack of a unified basis for com-
parison: Although Wang et al. (2024a) cover all
three paradigms, they do not analyze the imple-
mentation of algorithmic frameworks in a unified
basis. In contrast, we summarize task-agnostic
LLM-profiled roles as the foundation for the devel-
opment of algorithmic frameworks across different
paradigms. Notably, Wang et al. (2024a) also dis-
cuss LLM profiling, but their focus is on personas,
which are not relevant to the general roles that un-
derpin these frameworks. We select four surveys
according to their citations on Google Scholar for
demonstration purposes, as shown in Table 1.
Contributions
This survey offers the following
contributions.
1) Reviewing the breadth of environments the
agents are applicable to (§2): Before investigat-
ing LLM-based agents, it is essential to define the
scope of universality by summarizing the environ-
ments in which these agents operate. We categorize
the evaluated environments and tasks from the orig-
inal manuscripts of the reviewed frameworks into
two main types: decision-making environments
arXiv:2406.05804v6  [cs.AI]  30 Nov 2024


(a) Base Workflows.
(b) Workflows for Feedback Learning.
(c) Workflows for Tool Use, with validation types categorized under both Tool Use and Feedback Learning
paradigms.
(d) Search Workflows for Planning.
Figure 1: Common workflows based on three LLM-Profiled Roles (LMPRs): Policy, Evaluator and Dynamic
Model. Numbers in circles indicate the sequence of execution for each step. Unnumbered lines represent iterative
steps. Tool-use steps autonomously determined by LMPRs are marked by dashed lines. Circles labeled “-1” in
the circles indicate the final step. The ‘Tool Invocation‘ and ‘Search Tree/Graph‘ text boxes indicate that these
processes/objects are maintained in agent programs.


Tool Use
Planning
Feedback Learning
Universal
LMPRs
Task-
Specific
Tools
Workflows
Direct Plan-
ning
Planning
via Search
Workflows
Feedback
Sources
Workflows
Guo et al.
(2024)
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
✓(§3.4)
✗
✗
Xi
et
al.
(2023)
✓(§3.3)
✗
✓(§3.1.4)
✗
✗
✓(§3.1.4)
✗
✗
Huang et al.
(2024)
✗
✗
✓(§3)
✓(§4)
✗
✓(§6)
✗
✗
Wang et al.
(2024a)
✓(§2.1.4)
✗
✓(§2.1.3)
✓(§2.1.3)
✗
✓(§2.1.3)
✗
✗
Ours
✗
✓(§4.2)
✓(§4.1)
✓(§4.3)
✓
✓(§4.4)
✓(§4.4)
✓(§3)
Table 1: Coverage of four highly cited surveys and ours. The section numbers of the original manuscripts for
the covered perspectives are demonstrated for further reference. We acknowledge the coverage with at least one
paragraph focus on that topic.
and Natural Language Interaction (NLI) envi-
ronments, the latter framed from traditional Nat-
ural Language Processing (NLP) tasks for agent-
based setups.
2) Summarizing universal LLM-profiled roles
and workflows (§3 and §4): Workflow designs
under planning and feedback-learning paradigms
are often based on complex algorithms, such as
depth- or breadth-first search (Yao et al., 2023a)
and Monte Carlo Tree Search (Hao et al., 2023) for
planning, as well as Reinforcement Learning (RL)
for feedback learning (Shinn et al., 2023). The
complexity increases when these algorithms are
adapted to different environments. We aim to tran-
scend the boundaries of these complex workflows
by exploring those that can be universal across all
types of environments. Additionally, we also inves-
tigate the workflows for tool use. Such exploration
is based on three universal LLM-profile roles.
3) Highlighting essential perspectives on LM-
PRs, workflows, and frameworks (§5 and §6):
We compare the implementations of LMPRs across
various workflow types, emphasize workflows
across different paradigms, and present alternative
viewpoints to our formalization to prevent confu-
sion. Additionally, we critically discuss three lim-
itations of current frameworks and systematically
identify potential workflow designs in future re-
search.
2
Task Universality
This section explores task environments where var-
ious workflow types are applicable.
2.1
Feedback-Based, Decision-Making
Environments
In this setting, actions yield clear environmental
dynamics and rewards for agents to learn from.
They are typical environments to evaluate planning
and RL agents (Russell and Norvig, 2010; Sutton
and Barto, 2018).
Rule-Based Game Environments
These envi-
ronments, which are deterministic and fully observ-
able, include a variety of abstract strategy games
like Chess and Go, and logic puzzles such as the
Game of 24 (Yao et al., 2023a) and Blocksworld
(Hao et al., 2023). They demand deep logical rea-
soning and strategic planning to navigate and solve.
Embodied Environments
These settings simu-
late physical interactions and spatial relationships
in the real world. They require agents to engage in
navigation, object manipulation, and other complex
physical tasks (Shridhar et al., 2021; Puig et al.,
2018; Fan et al., 2022), reflecting changes in the
physical environment.
2.2
Information Processing Environments
Web Environments
The focus in web-based AI
applications is more on processing information and
user interaction. Webshop (Yao et al., 2022) ne-
cessitates a sequence of actions to interact with
the environment, such as searching for a product,
choosing a color, and clicking “buy.” AppWorld
(Trivedi et al., 2024) demands a more complex con-
trol flow, based on rich programs.


Env Types
Entities Interacted With
by Agent
Action Properties
Examples
of
Action
Instances
Examples of Env
Game
Environments
Virtual game elements
(objects,
avatars,
other characters), and
possibly other players
or game narratives
Discrete, Executable,
Deterministic
Move(Right)
BlocksWorld
(Valmeekam
et al., 2022), CrossWords
(Yao et al., 2023a)
Embodied
Environments
Physical world (through
sensors and actuators)
Discrete, Executable,
Deterministic
Pick_Up[Object]
AlfWorld (Shridhar et al.,
2021),
VirtualHome (Puig
et al., 2018), Minecraft (Fan
et al., 2022)
Web
Environments
Virtual web elements
Discrete, Executable,
Deterministic
search(3 ounce
bright
citrus),
click(Buy Now)
Webshop (Yao et al., 2022),
WebArena
(Zhou
et
al.,
2024b), AppWorld (Trivedi
et al., 2024)
NLIEs
Humans
(through
conversation or text)
Free-form,
Discrete,
Stochastic
The answer is
Answer,
Finish[Answer]
GSM8K Cobbe et al. (2021),
HotpotQA (Yang et al., 2018)
Table 2: Common Task Environments. An action instance is commonly formalized by action predicates and action
arguments. NLIEs refer to Natural Language Interaction Environments.
Natural Language Interaction Environments
Typical NLP tasks are often recontextualized as
agentic environments in the study of LLM-based
agents (Yao et al., 2023b; Hao et al., 2023; Yao
et al., 2023a).
In this survey, we refer to this
setting as Natural Language Interaction Environ-
ments (NLIEs) for brevity. In NLIEs, the environ-
ment remains static until the agent acts. Unlike
typical task environments where natural language
serves as an intermediary, in NLIEs, both the states
and actions are defined linguistically, making the
states conceptual and the actions often ambigu-
ous and broadly defined. Common setups include:
1) Single-Step NLIEs: Some works (Yao et al.,
2023b; Shinn et al., 2023) frame the traditional
question-answering (QA) setup as a single-step
decision-making process, where the agent gener-
ates an answer in response to a question. The pro-
cess starts with the question as the initial state and
concludes when the answer is provided as an ac-
tion. Since each trial consists of just one step, there
are no environmental dynamics or external feed-
back. Here, QA encompasses not only typical tasks
(Cobbe et al., 2021) but also those often modeled
as QA tasks, such as code optimization (Shypula
et al., 2024). 2) Deliberate Multi-step NLIEs:
For tasks without naturally defined intermediate
steps, several studies have transformed NLP tasks
into a Markov Decision Process to facilitate agen-
tic workflows, e.g., search and planning (Yao et al.,
2023a; Hao et al., 2023). For example, Hao et al.
(2023) reformulate subquestions in QA tasks as
actions, enabling responses to user queries through
a multi-step process. This approach allows the ini-
tial question to serve as the beginning of a series
of state transitions. Actions may vary from pro-
viding direct, free-form answers in single-step QA
to strategically proposing subquestions that navi-
gate the agent through sequential updates toward
a comprehensive solution. Additionally, Wan et al.
(2024) suggest that “splitting an output sequence
into tokens might be a good choice” for defining
multi-step NLIEs methodically. Furthermore, Yao
et al. (2023a) formulate two-step NLIEs for cre-
ative writing by segmenting the problem-solving
process into distinct planning and execution phases.
Remark 1. In NLP, tasks represent the high-
est level of abstraction for modeling, whereas in
decision-making processes, environments serve this
role. It is common to describe an agent as being
developed for a specific environment, such as an
embodied environment, or for a particular task,
such as QA. We refer to it as an NLIE-QA.
3
LLM-Profiled Roles (LMPRs)
In this section, we demonstrate three common types
of LLM-profiled Roles (LMPRs): policy models,
evaluators, and dynamic models. They are task-
agnostic and commonly used across various work-
flows.
LLM-Profiled Policy glmpolicy
glmpolicy is de-
signed to generate decisions, which could be an
action or a series of actions (plans) for execution
in external environments or planning. In contrast
to typical RL policy models, which learn to max-


imize cumulative rewards through trial and error,
LLM-profiled policy models, denoted as glmpolicy,
utilize pre-trained knowledge and commonsense
derived from extensive textual data. We distinguish
between two types of glmpolicy: an actor glmactor
directly maps a state to an action, whereas a plan-
ner glmplanner generates a sequence of actions from
a given state.
LLM-Profiled Evaluator glmeval
glmeval pro-
vides feedback crucial for different workflows. Dur-
ing planning, it evaluates each step of actions or the
resulting states (Hao et al., 2023; Yao et al., 2023a),
and during feedback learning, they revise the entire
decisions (Shinn et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023b).
Further details are provided in the next subsection.
LLM-Profiled
Dynamic
Models
glmdynamic
They predict or describe changes to the environ-
ment. Generally, dynamic models form part of
a comprehensive world model by predicting the
next state s′ from the current state s and action a.
While typical RL uses the probability distribution
p(s′ | s, a) to model potential next states, LLM-
based dynamic models directly predict the next
state s′ = glmdynamic(s, a).
4
LMPR-Based Workflows
We explore four types of workflows based on the
three types of LMPRs, as illustrated in Figure 1.
Table 3 summarizes the use of these workflows for
different paradigms in the prior works.
4.1
Base Workflows
The base workflow is as simple as the interac-
tion between glmpolicy and the environment. These
workflows can be categorized based on LLM pro-
filing into two types: planners and actors. 1) Plan-
ners: Many existing frameworks, such as those
designed for embodied environments (e.g., Huang
et al. (2022)), fall under this category.
While
some frameworks (Dasgupta et al., 2022; Wang
et al., 2023b) involve complex interactions with
task-specific components and low-level, non-LLM-
based actors, their universal workflow remains as
simple as the base workflow. For NLIEs, the com-
plete workflow often follows this base model with-
out additional interaction, as seen in Wang et al.
(2023a). 2) Actors: Early prompting frameworks
for language generation tasks (classified as single-
step NLIEs), such as Chain-of-Thought (Wei et al.,
2022; Kojima et al., 2022), fit into this category.
For embodied tasks, ReAct (Yao et al., 2023b) em-
ploys glmactor.
4.2
Tool-Use Workflows
We categorize two types of passive workflows and
identify two types of autonomous workflows de-
scribed in previous studies.
RAG-Style Tool Use
A common example of pas-
sive tool use is Retrieval-Augmented Generation
(RAG) (Lewis et al., 2020), commonly used in
NLIE-QA tasks. In this setup, given a query, a
retrieval mechanism collects relevant information
to assist glmpolicy in generating a response.
Passive Validation
Guan et al. (2023) adopt
an inverse approach for plan generation. Here,
glmpolicy first generates a plan, which is then val-
idated by a separate tool. Depending on the vali-
dation outcome, the information may or may not
be used to revise the initial plan generated by
glmpolicy.
Autonomous Tool Use
In this paradigm, LLMs
must be aware of the available tools, which requires
including tool information during LLM profiling.
The workflow must also handle signals from LMPR
generation to invoke tools. Different methods can
be applied to enable glmpolicy to autonomously trig-
ger tool usage. 1) In-Generation Triggers: Tools
could be invoked during the reasoning process (In-
aba et al., 2023; Gou et al., 2024). The agent pro-
gram monitors token generation and pauses when
a tool trigger is detected. This pause allows the
tool to be invoked, its output processed, and the
results integrated into the reasoning process. Trig-
gers are defined through tool descriptions, few-shot
demonstrations 1, or a combination of both 2. 2)
Reasoning-Acting Strategy: Introduced by Yao
et al. (2023b), each reasoning or acting step com-
pletes a full inference cycle, ending with the genera-
tion of a stop token. Hence, token-level monitoring
is unnecessary. The workflow prompts explicitly
for each acting step. 3) Confidence-Based Invo-
cation: Firstly, glmpolicy generates an initial action,
and the decision to invoke a tool is based on the
confidence level of the generated tokens. Jiang et al.
(2023) use this method for retrieval invocation, al-
though it is not suitable for general tool use since
it cannot specify which tool to invoke.
1See an example prompt in Table 13
2See an example prompt in Table 7


Types
Subtypes
Universal
LMPRs
Used For
Related Frameworks
Base
glmactor
glmactor
/
ReAct (Yao et al., 2023b), CoT (Wei et al., 2022)
glmplanner
glmplanner
Planning
Huang et al. (2022), DEPS (Wang et al., 2023b), Planner-Actor-Reporter
(Dasgupta et al., 2022), Plan-and-solve (Wang et al., 2023a), OPEx (Shi
et al., 2024a)
Tool-Use
RAG-Style
(Passive)
glmpolicy
Tool Use
RAG (Lewis et al., 2020; Shi et al., 2024b; Wang et al., 2024b; Zhang
et al., 2024)
Passive Val-
idation
Tool
Use,
Feedback
Learning
glmpolicy
Guan et al. (2023)
Autonomous
glmpolicy
Tool-Use
MultiTool-CoT (Inaba et al., 2023), ReAct (Yao et al., 2023b), Active
RAG Jiang et al. (2023)
Autonomous
Validation
glmpolicy,
glmeval
Tool
Use,
Feedback
Learning
CRITIC (Gou et al., 2024)
Search
Traversal
& Heuristic
glmpolicy,
glmeval
Planning
Tree-of-Thoughts (ToT) (Yao et al., 2023a), Tree-BeamSearch (Xie
et al., 2023), Boost-of-Thoughts (Chen et al., 2024a), Graph-of-Thoughts
(Besta et al., 2024), Tree-of-Traversal (Markowitz et al., 2024)
Simulation-
based
(MCTS)
glmpolicy,
glmeval,
glmdynamic
Planning
RAP (Hao et al., 2023), LLM-MCTS (Zhao et al., 2023), Wan et al.
(2024), AgentQ (Putta et al., 2024), Chen et al. (2024b), Yu et al. (2023),
Sprueill et al. (2023)
Feedback
Learning
from
glmeval only
glmpolicy,
glmeval
Feedback
Learning
Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023), Self-refine (Madaan et al., 2023),
TextGrad (Yuksekgonul et al., 2024)
from
glmeval
&
Task Env
glmpolicy,
glmeval
Feedback
Learning
Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023)
from
Hu-
mans
glmpolicy
Feedback
Learning
CRITIC (Gou et al., 2024)
Table 3: Universal Workflows of LLM-Based Agents.
Autonomous Validation
Gou et al. (2024) uti-
lize glmpolicy to generate an initial response. The
resulting action(s) and the state(s) (i.e., a trajectory)
are then passed to glmevaluator, which autonomously
determines whether tools should be invoked for val-
idation.
Remark 2. Tool-use workflows for validation can
be viewed as a form of feedback learning, where
glmpolicy receives feedback from the tools.
4.3
Search Workflows
Traversal and Heuristic-Based Search
Gener-
ations from glmpolicy, instead of direct execution
in environments, are used to expand nodes for ex-
ploration, stored in a tree or graph structure, such
as Tree-Of-Thoughts (ToT) (Yao et al., 2023a) and
its variants (Chen et al., 2024a; Besta et al., 2024).
glmeval provides a fixed value estimate to select a
node for further expansion. To expand a tree, ToT
applies depth-/breadth-first search (DFS and BFS),
while Xie et al. (2023) apply beam search. Notably,
the BFS here is functionally equivalent to beam
search with N beams as the utility model glmeval
is used to maintain the N most promising nodes. 3
Simulation-Based
Search
Simulation-based
search for LLM-based planning agents is often
carried out using the classic Monte Carlo Tree
Search (MCTS) algorithm (Hao et al., 2023; Zhao
et al., 2023; Putta et al., 2024). Similar to ToT (Yao
et al., 2023a), a tree is built through search and
is expanded with glmpolicy and glmeval. However,
there are two key differences: 1) Node Selection:
The nodes chosen for expansion are determined
not only by the static outputs from glmeval or other
heuristics (whether they indicate goal attainment),
but also by the cumulative statistics accrued over
multiple simulations. Specifically, nodes that lead
to better average rewards for subsequent nodes
across all simulations (or trajectories) are indeed
more likely to be expanded further. 2) Simulation
: Following the selection and expansion phases.
A simulation phrase is required where glmpolicy,
glmdynamic and glmeval are intimately collaborated,
3Typically, BFS does not rely on a utility model to decide
which nodes to expand, since it systematically explores all
possible nodes at each level until a terminal state.


functioning as the roll-out policy.
Specifically,
glmpolicy samples an action at given the current
state st, which in turn, is assessed by glmeval. The
top-scoring action is selected, with glmdynamic
using it to derive st+1, iteratively simulating the
trajectory.
4.4
Feedback-Learning Workflows
Within feedback-learning workflows, feedback is
fed into glmpolicy for learning.
One common
source of feedback is glmeval, as in Self-Refine
(Madaan et al., 2023). Other common feedback
sources include task environments (e.g., Reflex-
ion (Shinn et al., 2023)), tools (Gou et al., 2024;
Guan et al., 2023) and humans Guan et al. (2023).
Among these, glmeval can optionally be used to
revise feedback with more contextualized infor-
mation. In the original manuscript of Reflexion
(Shinn et al., 2023), glmeval corresponds to “self-
reflection,” whereas the term “evaluator” refers to
either heuristics or an LLM-profiled classifier that
generates sparse feedback. However, this evaluator
could be disregarded as a universal LMPR for two
reasons: 1) Heuristics are mostly used and lead to
better performance, and 2) the evaluator’s outputs
eventually are fed to “self-reflection” for verbal
feedback. When tools are employed to provide
feedback (Gou et al., 2024; Guan et al., 2023), the
workflow is the same as the tool-use workflow. In
this setup, the necessity of invoking tools for feed-
back is either autonomously determined by glmeval
(Gou et al., 2024) (See Table 13 for an example) or
hardcoded (Guan et al., 2023).
Remark 3. Unrealistic Feedback Source: So far,
external feedback from NLIE-QA cannot be re-
alistically generated. Some frameworks use the
feedback-learning loop where the feedback source
is unrealistic Particularly, Shinn et al. (2023); Zhou
et al. (2024a) use ground truths to generate feed-
back. However, we acknowledge that ground-truth
feedback is appropriate when the framework serves
as an evaluation baseline, as used by Yao et al.
(2023a).
5
Discussions
Prompting Methods for Profiling
In the previ-
ous subsection, we categorize the original works
proposing Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompting, in-
cluding zero-shot CoT (Wei et al., 2022) and CoT
with few-shot demonstrations (Kojima et al., 2022),
under the base workflow since the original work
solves task directly via the base workflow. How-
ever, these methods themselves can be generalized
to different types of LMPRs and workflows, as
shown in Appendix B. Some points of the specific
use in agents should be highlighted: 1) For plan-
ner profiling, zero-shot CoT implementations often
fail to produce long-horizon plans (Wang et al.,
2023b). 2) To actor profiling under autonomous
tool-use workflows, particularly with reasoning-
acting strategies, the tool definitions are required
to be included in the prompt; and few-shot demon-
strations are important to give a clue of generation
formats for LLMs including the indication of when
to stop.
Workflow Comparisons for Plan Generation
Both the base workflow using glmplanner and search
workflows generate a sequence of actions (i.e., a
plan). However, they differ fundamentally in how
the plans are generated and used. 1) Greedy Gen-
eration vs. Exploration: The base workflow lever-
ages glmplanner to greedily generate a static plan in
a single inference step. This approach often strug-
gles with long-horizon plans for complex tasks
(Sun et al., 2023). In contrast, search workflows
explore multiple potential solutions and support
backtracking, allowing for more robust exploration
of options. 2) Plan Execution: The plans gener-
ated by glmplanner, BFS, DFS, and Beam Search are
intended for full execution. However, this can lead
to unexecutable actions, especially in the stochas-
tic decision-making environments, if prior actions
(a1, ..., at−1) leads to a state where the next ac-
tion at is invalid (e.g., ‘standing in front of the
fridge‘ but needing to ‘open the microwave‘). This
may cause abrupt interruption in the agent perfor-
mance. In contrast, in the simulated-absed search
via MCTS, only the action at the root node is exe-
cuted in the actual environment. Subsequent simu-
lated states and actions are discarded, though some
implementations may partially retain these states to
avoid recomputation. This search process repeats
after every action taken, continuously recalculating
the best action for the updated state.
Workflow Comparisons for Using glmactor
The
glmactor performs one of three types of actions, de-
pending on the workflow: 1) In base and feedback-
learning workflows, glmactor consistently generates
task-relevant actions to be executed within the task
environment (executable task actions). 2) In a
search workflow, actions generated by glmactor are
used for planning algorithms rather than direct exe-


cution (planning task actions). 3) In autonomous
tool-use workflows, glmactor is responsible for gen-
erating tool-related actions (tool actions).
Workflow Comparisons for Using glmeval
In
feedback-learning workflows, the generation is
passed to glmpolicy for learning, while in search
workflows, it is used for planning. This funda-
mental difference (learning vs. planning) leads
to the following distinctions: 1) Feedback Use:
As shown in Figure 1, for learning, the output
is generated for glmpolicy to revise and regener-
ate the entire decision. In search workflows, the
output is used to construct a search tree/graph for
action selection and further expansion. 2) Feed-
back Forms: These components—glmpolicy and
serch trees/graphs—require different forms of feed-
back.
glmpolicy processes free-form text, while
MCTS utilizes continuous values as rewards, and
trees/graphs in BFS, DFS, or beam search rely
on discrete values for node selection. To meet
these varying needs, distinct task formulations are
employed, as summarized in Table 4. a) Gener-
ating free-form text: glmeval is prompted to re-
flect on previous states and actions, generating
reflective text as part of the glmpolicy prompt in
feedback-learning workflows (Shinn et al., 2023;
Gou et al., 2024). b) Binary/multiclass classifica-
tion: glmeval is prompted with specific constraints
to generate discrete output tokens, typically “no” or
“yes.” The tokens are converted into scalar values
(e.g., 0/1) for use as rewards in MCTS simulations
(Hao et al., 2023), or to guide decision-making dur-
ing tree traversal (Yao et al., 2023a). c) Binary
classification with scalar values: This approach
differs from the previous one by employing token
logits generated by LLMs as scalar feedback values.
For example, the probability of a “yes” response is
computed as:
v = probs“yes” =
el“yes”
el“yes” + el“no” ,
where l“yes” and l“no” are the logits for “yes” and
“no” tokens, respectively. 4 These scalar values can
then be used as rewards in MCTS. d) Multi-choice
QA: This formulation is used in scenarios that
require selecting from multiple choices, such as
choosing from top-N possible actions in traversal-
based search workflows (Yao et al., 2023a).
4Note that such implementations of glmeval are less com-
mon due to their inaccessibility of state-of-the-art black-box
LLMs.
6
Limitations and Future Works
Limitation 1: A Unified Solution for Base Work-
flows and Autonomous Tool-Use Workflows
ReAct (Yao et al., 2023b) tries to unify the au-
tonomous tool-use workflow and the base workflow
via the reasoning-acting strategy. In this scenario,
they implicitly unify tools as a part of task environ-
ments, and tool actions and task actions are unified
to similar formats. However, the two workflows are
still distinct: 1) specifying and comparing different
tool-use workflows in a fine-grained manner, 2) dis-
tinguishing the two can avoid an illusion that it is
universally implementable workflow. Specifically,
for the latter, the sequence in which reasoning and
action outputs alternate is task-dependent. For QA
tasks, the generations of reasoning steps and tool
actions are fixed, with alternating prompts for think-
ing and acting. 5. In contrast, for embodied tasks,
the decision whether to proceed with thinking or
acting in the next step is autonomously determined
by glmpolicy
6.
Limitation 2: Lack of Universal Tool-Use Work-
flow Design
Another future direction is the devel-
opment of universal tool use. Although tool use is
a universally applicable paradigm, current research
tends to focus on using tools for specific tasks such
as NLIE-QA or specialized purposes—either en-
abling glmpolicy to retrieve new information or en-
abling glmeval for validation.
Limitation 3: Formulating Language Tasks as
Agentic Tasks
The formulation can help develop
a more universally used workflow, e.g., Reflexion
(Shinn et al., 2023). However, some deliberate de-
sign should be reconsidered for future work, such
as the use of ground truths as external feedback in
Remark 3. Another questionable setting is delib-
erate multi-step NLIEs, e.g., what if a question is
simple enough to be answered without the need to
be decomposed into subquestions.
Devising New Workflows
Our systematic re-
view reveals potential directions for devising
new workflows by intertwining existing ones.
These workflows can be combined within a single
paradigm—for instance, integrating different feed-
back sources or blending validation-based tool use
5Reasoning-Acting Strategy (QA tasks): See an example
prompt in Table 8
6Reasoning-Acting Strategy (embodied tasks): See an ex-
ample prompt in Table 6


Task Formulation
Feedback Types
Applicable Workflows
Example Works
Text Generation
Free-form reflection
Feedback-learning
workflows
Self-Refine (Madaan et al., 2023), Reflexion (Shinn
et al., 2023), CRITIC (Gou et al., 2024)
Binary/Multi-class
Classification
Discrete values
Search workflows
RAP (Hao et al., 2023), Tree-BeamSearch (Xie et al.,
2023), ToT (Yao et al., 2023a), Koh et al. (2024)
Binary Classifica-
tion
Continuous values (log-
its)
Search workflow via
MCTS
RAP (Hao et al., 2023)
Multi-choice QA
Choices of top-N ac-
tions
Search workflows via
traversal and heuristic
ToT (Yao et al., 2023a)
Table 4: Types of LLM-Profiled Evaluators According to Task Formulation and Feedback Types
with autonomous tool use. There is even greater po-
tential for combining workflows across paradigms,
such as incorporating optional feedback sources
into non-validation tool-use workflows. In fact,
validation-style workflows (Gou et al., 2024; Jiang
et al., 2023) inherently merge elements of both the
feedback-learning and tool-use paradigms.
7
Conclusion
This survey formalizes three common types of
LLM-Profiled Roles (LMPRs) and investigates uni-
versal workflows for tool use, planning, and feed-
back learning. Since they are not task-specific,
we hope that this will enlighten future research on
employing LLM-based workflow designs across
different tasks. Also, under the shuttle of these LM-
PRs and workflows, we discuss some nuances of
LLM profiling, workflow pros & cons, and frame-
work implementations.
Limitations
Due to the page limit, we can only focus on rep-
resentative and pioneering work (primarily in *
ACL, ICML, ICLR, and NeurIPS) and the perspec-
tives that align with our focus. That means some
recent work may be missed, and task-specific com-
ponents and complete workflow designs are mostly
ignored, especially for those frameworks designed
for embodied environments. For example, a visual
model is normally required to translate pixel obser-
vations into textual inputs for glmpolicy (Wang et al.,
2023a). Again, this review aims to summarize the
task-agnostic workflows to facilitate a coherent un-
derstanding and identify their limitations for future
research.
References
Maciej Besta, Nils Blach, Ales Kubicek, Robert Gersten-
berger, Michal Podstawski, Lukas Gianinazzi, Joanna
Gajda, Tomasz Lehmann, Hubert Niewiadomski, Pi-
otr Nyczyk, et al. 2024. Graph of thoughts: Solving
elaborate problems with large language models. In
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, volume 38, pages 17682–17690.
Sijia Chen, Baochun Li, and Di Niu. 2024a. Boosting
of thoughts: Trial-and-error problem solving with
large language models. In The Twelfth International
Conference on Learning Representations.
Ziru Chen, Michael White, Ray Mooney, Ali Payani,
Yu Su, and Huan Sun. 2024b. When is tree search
useful for LLM planning? it depends on the discrimi-
nator. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-
ume 1: Long Papers), pages 13659–13678, Bangkok,
Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian,
Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias
Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro
Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John Schulman.
2021. Training verifiers to solve math word prob-
lems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168.
Ishita Dasgupta, Christine Kaeser-Chen, Kenneth
Marino, Arun Ahuja, Sheila Babayan, Felix Hill, and
Rob Fergus. 2022. Collaborating with language mod-
els for embodied reasoning. In Second Workshop on
Language and Reinforcement Learning.
Linxi Fan, Guanzhi Wang, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Man-
dlekar, Yuncong Yang, Haoyi Zhu, Andrew Tang,
De-An Huang, Yuke Zhu, and Anima Anandkumar.
2022. Minedojo: Building open-ended embodied
agents with internet-scale knowledge. In Thirty-sixth
Conference on Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems Datasets and Benchmarks Track.
Roberto Gallotta, Graham Todd, Marvin Zammit, Sam
Earle, Antonios Liapis, Julian Togelius, and Geor-
gios N Yannakakis. 2024. Large language models
and games: A survey and roadmap. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.18659.
Zhibin Gou, Zhihong Shao, Yeyun Gong, yelong shen,
Yujiu Yang, Nan Duan, and Weizhu Chen. 2024.
CRITIC: Large language models can self-correct
with tool-interactive critiquing. In The Twelfth Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations.


Lin Guan, Karthik Valmeekam, Sarath Sreedharan,
and Subbarao Kambhampati. 2023. Leveraging pre-
trained large language models to construct and uti-
lize world models for model-based task planning.
In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems.
Taicheng Guo, Xiuying Chen, Yaqi Wang, Ruidi Chang,
Shichao Pei, Nitesh V Chawla, Olaf Wiest, and Xi-
angliang Zhang. 2024. Large language model based
multi-agents: A survey of progress and challenges.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01680.
Shibo Hao, Yi Gu, Haodi Ma, Joshua Hong, Zhen
Wang, Daisy Wang, and Zhiting Hu. 2023.
Rea-
soning with language model is planning with world
model. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 8154–8173, Singapore. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Sihao Hu, Tiansheng Huang, Fatih Ilhan, Selim Tekin,
Gaowen Liu, Ramana Kompella, and Ling Liu. 2024.
A survey on large language model-based game agents.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.02039.
Wenlong Huang, Pieter Abbeel, Deepak Pathak, and
Igor Mordatch. 2022. Language models as zero-shot
planners: Extracting actionable knowledge for em-
bodied agents. In International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning, pages 9118–9147. PMLR.
Xu Huang, Weiwen Liu, Xiaolong Chen, Xingmei
Wang, Hao Wang, Defu Lian, Yasheng Wang, Ruim-
ing Tang, and Enhong Chen. 2024. Understanding
the planning of llm agents: A survey. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.02716.
Tatsuro Inaba, Hirokazu Kiyomaru, Fei Cheng, and
Sadao Kurohashi. 2023.
MultiTool-CoT: GPT-3
can use multiple external tools with chain of thought
prompting. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 2: Short Papers), pages 1522–1532, Toronto,
Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Zhengbao Jiang, Frank Xu, Luyu Gao, Zhiqing Sun,
Qian Liu, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Yiming Yang, Jamie
Callan, and Graham Neubig. 2023. Active retrieval
augmented generation. In Proceedings of the 2023
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 7969–7992, Singapore. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Jing Yu Koh, Stephen McAleer, Daniel Fried, and Rus-
lan Salakhutdinov. 2024. Tree search for language
model agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.01476.
Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yu-
taka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. 2022. Large lan-
guage models are zero-shot reasoners. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems.
Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio
Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Hein-
rich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rock-
täschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela. 2020.
Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-
intensive nlp tasks. In Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems, volume 33, pages 9459–
9474. Curran Associates, Inc.
Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler
Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri Alon,
Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang,
et al. 2023. Self-refine: Iterative refinement with
self-feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17651.
Potsawee Manakul, Adian Liusie, and Mark JF Gales.
2023. Selfcheckgpt: Zero-resource black-box hal-
lucination detection for generative large language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08896.
Elan Markowitz, Anil Ramakrishna, Jwala Dhamala,
Ninareh Mehrabi, Charith Peris, Rahul Gupta, Kai-
Wei Chang, and Aram Galstyan. 2024.
Tree-of-
traversals: A zero-shot reasoning algorithm for aug-
menting black-box language models with knowledge
graphs. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-
ume 1: Long Papers), pages 12302–12319, Bangkok,
Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Xavier Puig, Kevin Ra, Marko Boben, Jiaman Li,
Tingwu Wang, Sanja Fidler, and Antonio Torralba.
2018. Virtualhome: Simulating household activities
via programs. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages
8494–8502.
Pranav
Putta,
Edmund
Mills,
Naman
Garg,
Sumeet Ramesh Motwani,
Chelsea Finn,
Di-
vyansh Garg, and Rafael Rafailov. 2024. Agent q:
Advanced reasoning and learning for autonomous ai
agents.
Stuart J Russell and Peter Norvig. 2010. Artificial intel-
ligence a modern approach. London.
Shibani Santurkar, Esin Durmus, Faisal Ladhak, Cinoo
Lee, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. 2023.
Whose opinions do language models reflect? arXiv
preprint arXiv:2303.17548.
Haochen Shi, Zhiyuan Sun, Xingdi Yuan, Marc-
Alexandre Côté, and Bang Liu. 2024a. OPEx: A
component-wise analysis of LLM-centric agents in
embodied instruction following.
In Proceedings
of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
pages 622–636, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Weijia Shi, Sewon Min, Michihiro Yasunaga, Minjoon
Seo, Richard James, Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer,
and Wen-tau Yih. 2024b.
REPLUG: Retrieval-
augmented black-box language models. In Proceed-
ings of the 2024 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume
1: Long Papers), pages 8371–8384, Mexico City,
Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics.


Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Edward Berman, Ash-
win Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao.
2023. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal rein-
forcement learning. Preprint, arXiv:2303.11366.
Mohit Shridhar, Xingdi Yuan, Marc-Alexandre Cote,
Yonatan Bisk,
Adam Trischler,
and Matthew
Hausknecht. 2021. {ALFW}orld: Aligning text and
embodied environments for interactive learning. In
International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions.
Alexander G Shypula, Aman Madaan, Yimeng Zeng,
Uri Alon, Jacob R. Gardner, Yiming Yang, Mi-
lad Hashemi, Graham Neubig, Parthasarathy Ran-
ganathan, Osbert Bastani, and Amir Yazdanbakhsh.
2024. Learning performance-improving code edits.
In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
Representations.
Henry Sprueill, Carl Edwards, Mariefel Olarte, Ud-
ishnu Sanyal, Heng Ji, and Sutanay Choudhury. 2023.
Monte Carlo thought search: Large language model
querying for complex scientific reasoning in catalyst
design. In Findings of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, pages 8348–8365,
Singapore. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Haotian Sun, Yuchen Zhuang, Lingkai Kong, Bo Dai,
and Chao Zhang. 2023. Adaplanner: Adaptive plan-
ning from feedback with language models. In Thirty-
seventh Conference on Neural Information Process-
ing Systems.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. 2018. Reinforce-
ment learning: An introduction. MIT press.
Harsh Trivedi, Tushar Khot, Mareike Hartmann, Ruskin
Manku, Vinty Dong, Edward Li, Shashank Gupta,
Ashish Sabharwal, and Niranjan Balasubramanian.
2024. AppWorld: A controllable world of apps and
people for benchmarking interactive coding agents.
In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers), pages 16022–16076, Bangkok, Thai-
land. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Karthik Valmeekam, Alberto Olmo, Sarath Sreedharan,
and Subbarao Kambhampati. 2022. Large language
models still can’t plan (a benchmark for LLMs on
planning and reasoning about change). In NeurIPS
2022 Foundation Models for Decision Making Work-
shop.
Ziyu Wan, Xidong Feng, Muning Wen, Ying Wen,
Weinan Zhang, and Jun Wang. 2024. Alphazero-like
tree-search can guide large language model decoding
and training.
Lei Wang, Chen Ma, Xueyang Feng, Zeyu Zhang, Hao
Yang, Jingsen Zhang, Zhiyuan Chen, Jiakai Tang,
Xu Chen, Yankai Lin, et al. 2024a. A survey on large
language model based autonomous agents. Frontiers
of Computer Science, 18(6):1–26.
Lei Wang, Wanyu Xu, Yihuai Lan, Zhiqiang Hu,
Yunshi Lan, Roy Ka-Wei Lee, and Ee-Peng Lim.
2023a. Plan-and-solve prompting: Improving zero-
shot chain-of-thought reasoning by large language
models. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 2609–2634, Toronto,
Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Siyuan Wang, Zhongkun Liu, Wanjun Zhong, Ming
Zhou, Zhongyu Wei, Zhumin Chen, and Nan Duan.
2022. From lsat: The progress and challenges of
complex reasoning. IEEE/ACM Trans. Audio, Speech
and Lang. Proc., 30:2201–2216.
Xiaohua Wang, Zhenghua Wang, Xuan Gao, Feiran
Zhang,
Yixin Wu,
Zhibo Xu,
Tianyuan Shi,
Zhengyuan Wang, Shizheng Li, Qi Qian, et al. 2024b.
Searching for best practices in retrieval-augmented
generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.01219.
Zihao Wang, Shaofei Cai, Guanzhou Chen, Anji Liu,
Xiaojian Ma, and Yitao Liang. 2023b.
Describe,
explain, plan and select: Interactive planning with
LLMs enables open-world multi-task agents.
In
Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten
Bosma, brian ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi, Quoc V Le,
and Denny Zhou. 2022. Chain of thought prompt-
ing elicits reasoning in large language models. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
Zhiheng Xi, Wenxiang Chen, Xin Guo, Wei He, Yiwen
Ding, Boyang Hong, Ming Zhang, Junzhe Wang,
Senjie Jin, Enyu Zhou, et al. 2023. The rise and
potential of large language model based agents: A
survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.07864.
Yuxi Xie, Kenji Kawaguchi, Yiran Zhao, Xu Zhao,
Min-Yen Kan, Junxian He, and Qizhe Xie. 2023.
Self-evaluation guided beam search for reasoning.
In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems.
Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio,
William Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Christo-
pher D. Manning. 2018. HotpotQA: A dataset for
diverse, explainable multi-hop question answering.
In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
2369–2380, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Shunyu Yao, Howard Chen, John Yang, and Karthik
Narasimhan. 2022. Webshop: Towards scalable real-
world web interaction with grounded language agents.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
35:20744–20757.
Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran,
Thomas L. Griffiths,
Yuan Cao,
and Karthik
Narasimhan. 2023a.
Tree of thoughts: Deliber-
ate problem solving with large language models.
Preprint, arXiv:2305.10601.


Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak
Shafran, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
2023b. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting
in language models. In The Eleventh International
Conference on Learning Representations.
Xiao Yu, Maximillian Chen, and Zhou Yu. 2023.
Prompt-based Monte-Carlo tree search for goal-
oriented dialogue policy planning. In Proceedings of
the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing, pages 7101–7125, Singa-
pore. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Mert Yuksekgonul, Federico Bianchi, Joseph Boen,
Sheng Liu, Zhi Huang, Carlos Guestrin, and James
Zou. 2024. Textgrad: Automatic" differentiation" via
text. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.07496.
Peitian Zhang, Zheng Liu, Shitao Xiao, Zhicheng Dou,
and Jian-Yun Nie. 2024. A multi-task embedder for
retrieval augmented LLMs. In Proceedings of the
62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
pages 3537–3553, Bangkok, Thailand. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Zirui Zhao, Wee Sun Lee, and David Hsu. 2023. Large
language models as commonsense knowledge for
large-scale task planning. In Thirty-seventh Confer-
ence on Neural Information Processing Systems.
Wanjun Zhong, Ruixiang Cui, Yiduo Guo, Yaobo Liang,
Shuai Lu, Yanlin Wang, Amin Saied, Weizhu Chen,
and Nan Duan. 2023. Agieval: A human-centric
benchmark for evaluating foundation models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2304.06364.
Wanjun Zhong, Siyuan Wang, Duyu Tang, Zenan Xu,
Daya Guo, Yining Chen, Jiahai Wang, Jian Yin, Ming
Zhou, and Nan Duan. 2022. Analytical reasoning of
text. In Findings of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: NAACL 2022, pages 2306–2319,
Seattle, United States. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Andy Zhou, Kai Yan, Michal Shlapentokh-Rothman,
Haohan Wang, and Yu-Xiong Wang. 2024a. Lan-
guage agent tree search unifies reasoning acting and
planning in language models.
Shuyan Zhou, Frank F. Xu, Hao Zhu, Xuhui Zhou,
Robert Lo, Abishek Sridhar, Xianyi Cheng, Tianyue
Ou, Yonatan Bisk, Daniel Fried, Uri Alon, and Gra-
ham Neubig. 2024b.
Webarena: A realistic web
environment for building autonomous agents. In The
Twelfth International Conference on Learning Repre-
sentations.
A
Examples Prompts
A.1
LLM-Profiled Policy Models
1) Base Workflow: Prompts for a planner and an
actor are demonstrated in Table 5 and 6, respec-
tively. The content in the shadow box is generated
by LLM. 2) Tool-Use Workflow: Actors under
NLIE-QA is demonstrated in Table 7 and 8. The
former shows the implementation of in-generation
triggers, while the last one demonstrates the ReAct
implementation. 3) Search Workflow: An actor
is required during the expansion stage of MCTS
in the RAP workflow. The prompts and expected
generations are shown in Table 9.
A.2
Prompts for LLM Evaluators
Table 10 and 11 show LLM evaluators that are pro-
filed as classification tasks, while Table 13 demon-
strates another to generate free-form text.
A.3
Prompts as Dynamic Models
Table 14 is profiled as a dynamic model.
B
Prompting Methods of LLM-Profiled
Roles
The use of different prompting methods are sum-
marized in Table 15 .


Q: In a dance class of 20 students, 20% enrolled in contemporary dance, 25%
of the remaining enrolled in jazz dance, and the rest enrolled in hip-hop dance.
What percentage of the entire students enrolled in hip-hop dance?
A: Let’s first understand the problem and devise a plan to solve the problem.
Then, let’s carry out the plan and solve the problem step by step.
Plan:
Step 1:
Calculate the total number of students who enrolled in
contemporary and jazz dance.
Step 2: Calculate the total number of students who enrolled in hiphop
dance.
Step 3: Calculate the percentage of students who enrolled in hiphop
dance.
Solution:
Step 1: 20% of 20 students is 4 students. 25% of the remaining 16
students is 4 students. So, a total of 8 students enrolled in contemporary
and jazz dance.
Step 2: The remaining 12 students enrolled in hip-hop dance.
Step 3: The percentage of students who enrolled in hip-hop dance is
12/20 = 60%.
Therefore, the answer (arabic numerals) is
60%
Table 5: An LLM planner under NLIE-QA, implemented by zero-shot CoT. The CoT trigger is highlighted in red
font. The content in the shadow box is generated by LLM. Source from Wang et al. (2023a)


Interact with a household to solve a task. Here are two examples.
{Demo 1}
{Demo 2}
Here is the task: You are in the middle of a room. Looking quickly around you,
you see a cabinet 6, a cabinet 5, a cabinet 4, a cabinet 3, a cabinet 2, a cabinet 1,
a coffeemachine 1, a countertop 3, a countertop 2, a countertop 1, a drawer 3, a
drawer 2, a drawer 1, a fridge 1, a garbagecan 1, a microwave 1, a shelf 3, a
shelf 2, a shelf 1, a sinkbasin 1, a stoveburner 4, a stoveburner 3, a stoveburner
2, a stoveburner 1, and a toaster 1.
Your task is to: put a cool tomato in microwave.
>
think: To solve the task, I need to find a tomato, then cool it with the
fridge, and finally put it in the microwave.
OK.
>
think: First, I need to find a tomato. A tomato is more likely to be found
on the countertop (1-3), cabinet (1-6), drawer (1-3), shelf (1-3), or the
sinkbasin. I can start by checking the countertop 1.
OK. >
go to countertop 1
On the countertop 1, you see a dishsponge 1, and a mug 2. ...
Table 6: An LLM actor within base workflow under the Alfred World benchmark, implemented by few-shot CoT.
Source from (Yao et al., 2023b).


Use the following tools at your disposal and answer some questions:
- «Calculator»
- «Chemical reaction predictor»
- «Molar mass list»
Q: Find the amount of H2CO3 formed on combining 2 moles of CO2 and 2
moles of H2O.
A: First, use the chemical reaction predictor to determine the chemical equation
for the reaction.
Reactants: 2CO2, 2H2O
Products: ?H2CO3
«Chemical reaction predictor»
2CO2 + 2H2O →2H2CO3
Second, use the molar mass list to determine the molar mass of H2CO3.
H2CO3 «Molar mass list» 62 g/mol
Third, use the calculator to calculate the amount of 2 moles of H2CO3. 2×62 =
«Calculator» 124
Therefore, 124 g of H2CO3 is formed.
Q: Find the amount of Calcium hydroxide that is required to react with 2 moles
of Carbon dioxide to form 2 moles of Calcium carbonate along with 2 moles of
Water.
A:
Table 7: An LLM actor within tool-use workflow. In-generation triggers are highlighted in red font. Source from
MultiTool-CoT (Inaba et al., 2023)


Solve a question answering task by having a Thought, then Finish with your
answer. Thought can reason about the current situation. Finish[answer] returns
the answer and finishes the task.
Here are some examples:
Question 1: What is the elevation range for the area that the eastern sector of
the Colorado orogeny extends into?
Thought: Let’s think step by step. The eastern sector of Colorado orogeny
extends into the High Plains. High Plains rise in elevation from around 1,800 to
7,000 ft, so the answer is 1,800 to 7,000 ft.
Action: Finish[1,800 to 7,000 ft]
...
Question 6: Were Pavel Urysohn and Leonid Levin known for the same type
of work?
Thought: Let’s think step by step. Pavel Urysohn is a mathematician. Leonid
Levin is a mathematician and computer scientist. So Pavel Urysohn and Leonid
Levin have the same type of work.
Action: Finish[Yes]
END OF EXAMPLES)
Question: VIVA Media AG changed it´s name in 2004. What does their new
acronym stand for?
Thought:
Let’s think step by step. VIVA Media AG changed its name in 2004.
The new acronym must stand for the new name they adopted. To find
the answer, we need to research the new name of VIVA Media AG after
2004.Action: Finish[Further research is needed to determine the new
acronym.]
Action:
Finish[Further research is needed to determine the new acronym.]
Table 8: An LLM actor within tool-use workflow for the HotPot-QA benchmark, implemented by few-Shot CoT.
Source from ReAct (Yao et al., 2023b).


Given a question, please decompose it into sub-questions. For each sub-
question, please answer it in a complete sentence, ending with "The answer
is". When the original question is answerable, please start the subquestion with
"Now we can answer the question:"
Question 1: James writes a 3-page letter to 2 different friends twice a week.
How many pages does he write a year?
Question 1.1: How many pages does he write every week?
Answer 1.1: James writes a 3-page letter to 2 different friends twice a week, so
he writes 3 * 2 * 2 = 12 pages every week. The answer is 12.
Question 1.2: How many weeks are there in a year?
Answer 1.2: There are 52 weeks in a year. The answer is 52.
Question 1.3: Now we can answer the question: How many pages does he
write a year?
Answer 1.3: James writes 12 pages every week, so he writes 12 * 52 = 624
pages a year. The answer is 624.
...
Question 5: Janet’s ducks lay 16 eggs per day. She eats three for breakfast
every morning and bakes muffins for her friends every day with four. She sells
the remainder at the farmers’ market daily for $2 per fresh duck egg. How much
in dollars does she make every day at the farmers’ market?
Question 5.1:
How many eggs does Janet have left after eating three for breakfast and
baking muffins with four?
Table 9: An LLM actor for the GSM8K benchmark. Source from Hao et al. (2023).
Given a question and some sub-questions, determine whether the last sub-
question is useful to answer the question. Output ’Yes’ or ’No’, and a reason.
Question 1: Four years ago, Kody was only half as old as Mohamed. If
Mohamed is currently twice as 30 years old, how old is Kody?
Question 1.1: How old is Mohamed?
Question 1.2: How old was Mohamed four years ago?
New question 1.3: How old was Kody four years ago?
Is the new question useful? Yes. We need the answer to calculate how old is
Kody now.
...
Question 5: Janet’s ducks lay 16 eggs per day. She eats three for breakfast
every morning and bakes muffins for her friends every day with four. She sells
the remainder at the farmers’ market daily for $2 per fresh duck egg. How much
in dollars does she make every day at the farmers’ market?
New question 5.1: Now we can answer the question: How much in dollars
does she make every day at the farmers’ market?
Is the new question useful?
Table 10: An LLM evaluator within simulation-based search workflow for NLIE-QA, implemented by few-shot
CoT. It assesses the usefulness of new sub-questions in solving the original question. Source from Hao et al. (2023)


Evaluate if given numbers can reach 24 (sure/likely/impossible)
10 14
10 + 14 = 24
sure
...
1 3 3
1 * 3 * 3 = 9
(1 + 3) * 3 = 12
1 3 3 are all too small
impossible
11, 12
Table 11: An LLM evaluator within Tree-of-Thought Workflow under Game 24, implemented by few-Shot CoT
prompting. The LLM is profiled for multi-class classification. Source from ToT (Yao et al., 2023a).
Context: ...
Sentence: ...
Is the sentence supported by the context above?
Answer Yes or No:
Table 12: An LLM evaluator. The LLM is profiled for multi-class classification. Source from Manakul et al. (2023).


{Few-shot Demonstrations Omitted for Brevity}
Question: Serianna is a band of what genre that combines elements of heavy
metal and hardcore punk?
Proposed Answer: Let’s think step by step. Serianna is a band of metalcore
genre. Metalcore is a subgenre of heavy metal and hardcore punk. So Serianna
is a band of heavy metal and hardcore punk. So the answer is: heavy metal and
hardcore punk.
1. Plausibility:
The question asks for the genre that combines elements of heavy metal
and hardcore punk, and the answer is "heavy metal and hardcore punk",
simply repeat the question. So it’s not plausible.
2. Truthfulness: Let’s search the question in google:
> Search Query: Serianna is a band of what genre that combines elements
of heavy metal and hardcore punk?
> Evidence:
[Metalcore - Wikipedia] Metalcore is a fusion music genre that combines
elements of extreme metal and hardcore punk.
The evidence suggests that metalcore is a genre that combines elements
of extreme metal and hardcore punk, as stated in the proposed answer.
Let’s search the proposed answer in google:
> Search Query: Serianna is a band of metalcore genre.
> Evidence:
[Serianna - Wikipedia] Serianna was a metalcore band from Madison, Wiscon-
sin. The band formed in 2006...
The evidence suggests Serianna is a metalcore band, the proposed
answer is correct about this.
Above all, the proposed answer correctly identifies that Serianna is a
band of the metalcore genre, which combines elements of heavy metal
and hardcore punk. However, the final answer is not plausible since it
just lists the genres that metalcore combines.
Table 13: An LLM evaluator within the Feedback-Learning workflow (feedback from tools). In-generation triggers
are highlighted in red font, and tool-generated content is highlighted in green font. Source from Gou et al. (2024).


Given a question, please decompose it into sub-questions. For each sub-
question, please answer it in a complete sentence, ending with "The answer
is". When the original question is answerable, please start the subquestion with
"Now we can answer the question: ".
Question 1: Weng earns $12 an hour for babysitting. Yesterday, she just did 50
minutes of babysitting. How much did she earn?
Question 1.1: How much does Weng earn per minute?
Answer 1.1: Since Weng earns $12 an hour for babysitting, she earns $12 / 60
= $0.2 per minute. The answer is 0.2.
Question 1.2: Now we can answer the question: How much did she earn?
Answer 1.2: Working 50 minutes, she earned $0.2 x 50 = $10. The answer is
10.
...
Question 5: Janet’s ducks lay 16 eggs per day. She eats three for breakfast
every morning and bakes muffins for her friends every day with four. She sells
the remainder at the farmers’ market daily for $2 per fresh duck egg. How much
in dollars does she make every day at the farmers’ market?
Question 5.1: How many eggs does Janet have left after eating three for
breakfast and using four for muffins?
Answer 5.1:
Table 14: An LLM-Profiled Dynamic Model.
Prompting
Example Works
Example
Prompts
(in Appendix)
glmactor
Few-shot
ReAct (Yao et al., 2023b), Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023), RAP (Hao et al., 2023),
MultiTool-CoT (Inaba et al., 2023)
Table 7, 8
glmplanner
Zero-shot
Plan-and-Solve (Wang et al., 2023a), LLM Planner (Huang et al., 2022)
Table 5
Few-shot
DEPS (Wang et al., 2023b), Planner-Actor-Reporter (Dasgupta et al., 2022)
glmevaluator Few-shot
RAP (Hao et al., 2023), Tree-BeamSearch (Xie et al., 2023), Reflexion (Shinn
et al., 2023), CRITIC (Gou et al., 2024)
Table 10, 11
glmdynamic Few-shot
RAP (Hao et al., 2023)
Table 14
Table 15: Prompting Methods of LLM-Profiled Roles
